===== PAGE 1 =====
RMA: Rapid Motor Adaptation for Legged Robots
Ashish Kumar Zipeng Fu Deepak Pathak Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University UC Berkeley, Facebook
Fig. 1: We demonstrate the performance of RMA on several challenging environments. The robot is successfully able to walk on
sand, mud, hiking trails, tall grass and dirt pile without a single failure in all our trials. The robot was successful in 70% of the
trials when walking down stairs along a hiking trail, and succeeded in 80% of the trials when walking across a cement pile and
a pile of pebbles. The robot achieves this high success rate despite never having seen unstable or sinking ground, obstructive
vegetation or stairs during training. All deployment results are with the same policy without any simulation calibration, or
real-world fine-tuning. Videos at https://ashish-kmr.github.io/rma-legged-robots/
Abstract—Successful real-world deployment of legged robots tools of control theory [36, 43, 46, 16, 56, 63, 50, 26, 28, 2, 24].
would require them to adapt in real-time to unseen scenarios These methods require considerable expertise on the part of
like changing terrains, changing payloads, wear and tear. This
the human designer, and in recent years there has been much
paper presents Rapid Motor Adaptation (RMA) algorithm to
interest in replicating this success using reinforcement learning
solve this problem of real-time online adaptation in quadruped
robots. RMA consists of two components: a base policy and an and imitation learning techniques [23, 18, 41, 55, 32] which
adaptation module. The combination of these components enables could lower this burden, and perhaps also improve performance.
the robot to adapt to novel situations in fractions of a second. The standard paradigm is to train an RL-based controller in a
RMA is trained completely in simulation without using any
physics simulation environment and then transfer to the real
domain knowledge like reference trajectories or predefined foot
world using various sim-to-real techniques [52, 40, 23]. This
trajectory generators and is deployed on the A1 robot without
any fine-tuning. We train RMA on a varied terrain generator transfer has proven quite challenging, because the sim-to-real
using bioenergetics-inspired rewards and deploy it on a variety of gap itself is the result of multiple factors: (a) the physical robot
difficult terrains including rocky, slippery, deformable surfaces and its model in the simulator differ significantly; (b) real-
in environments with grass, long vegetation, concrete, pebbles,
world terrains vary considerably (Figure 1) from our models
stairs, sand, etc. RMA shows state-of-the-art performance across
of these in the simulator; (c) the physics simulator fails to
diverse real-world as well as simulation experiments. Video
results at https://ashish-kmr.github.io/rma-legged-robots/. accurately capture the physics of the real world – we are
dealing here with contact forces, deformable surfaces and the
I. INTRODUCTION
like – a considerably harder problem than modeling rigid bodies
Great progress has been made in legged robotics over the last moving in free space.
forty years through the modeling of physical dynamics and the In this paper, we report on our progress on solving this
1202
luJ
8
]GL.sc[
1v43040.7012:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
A) Training in Simulation
Phase 1 x t, a t−1
Mass, COM, Friction
z Base Policy (π)
Terrain Height (e t) Env Factor Encoder (μ) t
Motor Strength
*Trainable Modules in Red Regress a
t
Phase 2
x t, a t−1
x t−51 , a t−51 Base Policy (π)
Adaptation Module (ϕ) z ̂
t
x t−1 , a t−1
Physics Simulation
B) Deployment
x t, a t−1
x t−50 , a t−51
Adaptation Module (ϕ) z
Bas
1
e
0
P
0
o
H
lic
z
y (π) a
t
̂
t
10 Hz
x t, a t−1
Fig. 2: RMA consists of two subsystems - the base policy π and the adaptation module φ. Top: RMA is trained in two phases.
In the first phase, the base policy π takes as input the current state x , previous action a and the privileged environmental
t t−1
factors e which is encoded into the latent extrinsics vector z using the environmental factor encoder µ. The base policy is
t t
trained in simulation using model-free RL. In the second phase, the adaptation module φ is trained to predict the extrinsics zˆ
t
from the history of state and actions via supervised learning with on-policy data. Bottom: At deployment, the adaptation module
φ generates the extrinsics zˆ at 10Hz, and the base policy generates the desired joint positions at 100Hz which are converted to
t
torques using A1’s PD controller. Since the adaptation module runs at a lower frequency, the base policy consumes the most
recent extrinsics vector zˆ predicted by the adaptation module to predict a . This asynchronous design was critical for seamless
t t
deployment on low-cost robots like A1 with limited on-board compute. Videos at: https://ashish-kmr.github.io/rma-legged-robots/
challenge for quadruped locomotion, using as an experimental walking policy, but also RMA must be trained in simulation,
platform the relatively cheap A1 robot from Unitree. Figure 1 and directly deployed in the real world. But, how?
shows some sample examples with in-action results in the video. Figure 2 shows that RMA consists of two subsystems: the
Before outlining our approach (Figure 2), we begin by noting base policy π and the adaptation module φ, which work
that human walking in the real world entails rapid adaptation as together to enable online real time adaptation on a very
we move on different soils, uphill or downhill, carrying loads, diverse set of environment configurations. The base policy is
with rested or tired muscles, and coping with sprained ankles trained via reinforcement learning in simulation using privileged
and the like. Let us focus on this as a central problem for information about the environment configuration e such as
t
legged robots as well, and call it Rapid Motor Adaptation friction, payload, etc. Knowledge of the vector e allows the
t
(RMA). We will posit that RMA has to occur online, at a time base policy to appropriately adapt to the given environment.
scale of fractions of a second, which implies that we have no The environment configuration vector e is first encoded into a
t
time to carry out multiple experiments in the physical world, latent feature space z using an encoder network µ. This latent
t
rolling out multiple trajectories and optimizing to estimate vector z , which we call the extrinsics, is then fed into the
t
various system parameters. It may be worse than that. If we base policy along with the current state x and the previous
t
introduce the quadruped onto a rocky surface with no prior action a . The base policy then predicts the desired joint
t−1
experience, the robot policy would fail often, causing serious positions of the robot a . The policy π and the environmental
t
damage to the robot. Collecting even 3-5 mins of walking factor encoder µ are jointly trained via RL in simulation.
data in order to adapt the walking policy may be practically Unfortunately, this policy cannot be directly deployed
infeasible. Our strategy therefore entails that not just the basic because we don’t have access to e in the real world. What
t

===== PAGE 3 =====
we need to do is to estimate the extrinsics at run time, which approach to work. The vector of extrinsics z is a lower-
t
is the role of the adaptation module φ. The key insight is that dimensional nonlinear projection of the environmental
when we command a certain movement of the robot joints, the parameters. This takes care of some identifiability issues
actual movement differs from that in a way that depends on the where some parameters could covary with identical effects
extrinsics. So instead of using privileged information, we might on observables. Secondly, we don’t need this vector of
hope to use the recent history of the agent’s state to estimate this extrinsics to be correct in some “ground truth” sense.
extrinsics vector, analogously to the operation of a Kalman filter What matters is that it leads to the “right” action, and the
for state estimation from history of observables. Specifically, end-to-end training optimizes for that.
the goal of φ is to estimate the extrinsics vector z t from the • The range of situations seen in training should encompass
robot’s recent state and action history, without assuming any what the robot will encounter in the real world. We use
access to e . That is at runtime, but at training time, life is easier. a fractal terrain generator which accompanied by the
t
Since both the state history and the extrinsics vector z randomization of parameters such as mass, friction etc.
t
can be computed in simulation, we can train this module creates a wide variety of physical contexts in which the
via supervised learning. At deployment, both these modules walking robot has to react.
work together to perform robust and adaptive locomotion. In The most comparable work in terms of robust performance
our experimental setup with its limited on-board computing, of RL policies for legged locomotion in the real-world is that
the base policy π runs at 100 Hz, while the adaptation module of Lee et al. [32] which, unlike our work, relies on hand-coded
φ is slower and runs at 10Hz. The two run asynchronously in domain knowledge of predefined trajectory generator [25] and
parallel with no central clock to align them. The base policy motor models [23]. We evaluated RMA across a wide variety
just uploads the most recent prediction of the extrinsics vector of terrains in the real world (Figure 1). The proposed adaptive
z t from the adaptation module to predict action a t . controller is able to walk on slippery surfaces, uneven ground,
Our approach is in contrast to previous learning-based work deformable surfaces (such as foam, mattress, etc) and on rough
in locomotion that adapt learned policies via inferring the key terrain in natural environments such as grass, long vegetation,
parameters about the environment from a small dataset collected concrete, pebbles, rocky surfaces, sand, etc.
in every new situation to which the robot is introduced. These
could either be physical parameters like friction, etc. [7] or
II. RELATED WORK
their latent encoding [41]. Unfortunately, as mentioned earlier, Conventionally, legged locomotion has been approached
collecting such a dataset, when the robot hasn’t yet acquired by using control-based methods [36, 43, 16, 56, 50, 26, 28,
a good policy for walking, could result in falls and damage 2, 24, 4]. MIT Cheetah 3 [5] can achieve high speed and
to the robot. Our approach avoids this because RMA, through jump over obstacles by using regularized model predictive
the rapid estimation of z permits the walking policy to adapt control (MPC) and simplified dynamics [12]. The ANYmal
t
quickly 1 and avoid falls. robot [20] locomotes by optimizing a parameterized controller
Training of a base policy using RL with an extra argument for and planning based on an inverted pendulum model [15].
the environmental parameters has also been pursued in [57, 41]. However, these methods require accurate modeling of the real-
Our novel aspects are the use of a varied terrain generator world dynamics, in-depth prior knowledge of the robots, and
and “natural” reward functions motivated by bioenergetics manual tuning of gaits and behaviors. Optimizing controllers,
which allows us to learn walking policies without using any combined with MPC, can mitigate some of the problems
reference demonstrations [41]. But the truly novel contribution [30, 8, 9], however they still require significant task-specific
of this paper is the adaptation module, trained in simulation, feature engineering [11, 15, 3].
which makes RMA possible. This, at deployment time, has the
Learning for Legged Locomotion Some of the earliest
flavor of system identification, but it is an on-line version of
attempts to incorporate learning into locomotion can be dated
system identification, based just on the single trajectory that
back to DARPA Learning Locomotion Program [63, 64, 44, 62,
the robot has seen in the past fraction of a second. One might
27]. More recently, deep reinforcement learning (RL) offered
reasonably ask why it should work at all, but we can offer a
an alternative to alleviate the reliance on human expertise and
few speculations:
has shown good results in simulation [48, 33, 37, 14]. However,
• System identification is traditionally thought of as an such policies are difficult to transfer to the real world [31, 39, 6].
optimization problem. But in many settings researchers One approach is to directly train in the real world [18, 55].
have found that given sample (input, output) pairs of However, such policies are limited to very simple setups, and
optimization problems with their solutions, we could use scaling to complex setups requires unsafe exploration and a
a neural network to approximate the function mapping the large number of samples.
problem to its solution [1, 17]. Effectively that is what φ
Sim-to-Real Reinforcement Learning To achieve complex
is learning to do.
walking behaviours in the real world using RL, several methods
• We don’t need perfect system identification for the
try to bridge the Sim-to-Real gap. Domain randomization is a
class of methods in which the policy is trained with a wide
1RMAtakeslessthan1s,whereasPengetal.[41]needtocollect4−8mins
(50 episodes of 5−10s) of data. range of environment parameters and sensor noises to learn

===== PAGE 4 =====
behaviours which are robust in this range [51, 52, 40, 54, where τ = {(x ,a ,r ),(x ,a ,r )...} is the trajectory of
0 0 0 1 1 1
38]. However, domain randomization trades optimality for the agent when executing policy π, and p(τ|π) represents the
robustness leading to an over conservative policy [34]. likelihood of the trajectory under π.
Alternately, the Sim-to-Real gap can also be reduced by
making the simulation more accurate [23, 51, 19]. Tan et al. Stable Gait through Natural Constraints: Instead of adding
[51] improve the motor models by fitting a piece-wise linear artificial simulation noise, we train our agent under the
function to data from the actual motors [51]. Hwangbo et al. following natural constraints. First, the reward function is
[23], instead, use a neural network to parameterize the actuator motivated from bioenergetic constraints of minimizing work
model [23, 32]. However, these approaches require initial data and ground impact [42]. We found these reward functions to
collection from the robot to fit the motor model, and would be critical for learning realistic gaits in simulation. Second, we
require this to be done for every new setup. train our policies on uneven terrain (Figure 2) as a substitute
for additional rewards used by [23] for foot clearance and
System Identification and Adaptation Instead of being
robustness to external push. A walking policy trained under
agnostic to physics parameters, the policy can condition on
these natural constraints transfers to simple setups in the real
these parameters via online system identification. During
world (like concrete or wooden floor) without any modifications.
deployment in the real world, physics parameters can either
This is in contrast to other sim-to-real work which either
be inferred through a module that is trained in simulation [57],
calibrates the simulation with the real world [51, 23], or fine-
or be directly optimized for high returns by using evolutionary
tunes the policy in the real world [41]. The adaptation module
algorithms [58]. Predicting the exact system parameters is
then enables it to scale from simple setups to very challenging
often unnecessary and difficult, leading to poor performance
terrains as shown in Figure 1.
in practice. Instead, a low dimensional latent embedding can
be used [41, 61]. At test time, this latent can be optimized
RL Rewards: The reward function encourages the agent to
using real-world rollouts by using policy gradient methods [41],
move forward with a maximum speed of 0.35 m/s, and penalizes
Bayesian optimization [59], or random search [60]. Another
it for jerky and inefficient motions. Let’s denote the linear
approach is to use meta learning to learn an initialization of
velocity as v, the orientation as θ and the angular velocity as
policy network for fast online adaptation [13]. Although they
ω, all in the robot’s base frame. We additionally define the joint
have been demonstrated on real robots [49, 10], they still
angles as q, joint velocities as q˙, joint torques as τ, ground
require multiple real-world rollouts to adapt.
reaction forces at the feet as f, velocity of the feet as v and
f
the binary foot contact indicator vector as g. The reward at
III. RAPID MOTOR ADAPTATION
time t is defined as the sum of the following quantities:
We now describe each component of the RMA algorithm
introduced in the third paragraph of Section I and summarized 1) Forward: min(vt,0.35)
in Figure 2. Following sections discuss the base policy, the 2) Lateral Moveme x nt and Rotation: −(cid:107)vt(cid:107)2 − (cid:107)ωt (cid:107)2
adaptation module and the deployment on the real-robot in y yaw
3) Work: −|τT · (qt − qt−1)|
order. We will use the same notation as introduced in Section I.
4) Ground Impact: −(cid:107)ft − ft−1(cid:107)2
5) Smoothness: −(cid:107)τt − τt−1(cid:107)2
A. Base Policy
6) Action Magnitude: −(cid:107)at(cid:107)2
We learn a base policy π which takes as input the current 7) Joint Speed: −(cid:107)q˙t(cid:107)2
state x t ∈ R30, previous action a t−1 ∈ R12 and the extrinsics 8) Orientation: −(cid:107)θt (cid:107)2
vector z t ∈ R8 to predict the next action a t . The predicted 9) Z Acceleration: − ro (cid:107) l v l t , (cid:107)2 pitch
action a t is the desired joint position for the 12 robot joints 10) Foot Slip: −(cid:107)diag(gt z ) · v t(cid:107)2
f
which is converted to torque using a PD controller. The
extrinsics vector z is a low dimensional encoding of the
t The scaling factor of each reward term is 20, 21, 0.002, 0.02,
environment vector e ∈ R17 generated by µ.
t 0.001, 0.07, 0.002, 1.5, 2.0, 0.8 respectively.
z = µ(e ) (1)
t t
Training Curriculum: If we naively train our agent with the
a = π(x ,a ,z ) (2)
t t t−1 t
above reward function, it learns to stay in place because of
We implement µ and π as MLPs (details in Section IV-B). the penalty terms on the movement of the joints. To prevent
We jointly train the base policy π and the environmental factor this collapse, we follow the strategy described in [23]. We
encoder µ end to end using model-free reinforcement learning. start the training with very small penalty coefficients, and then
At time step t, π takes the current state x , previous action gradually increase the strength of these coefficients using a
t
a and the extrinsics z = µ(e ), to predict an action a . RL fixed curriculum. We also linearly increase the difficulty of
t−1 t t t
maximizes the following expected return of the policy π: other perturbations such as mass, friction and motor strength
(cid:34)T−1 (cid:35) as the training progresses. We don’t have any curriculum on
J(π) = E (cid:88) γtr , the terrains and start the training with randomly sampling the
τ∼p(τ|π) t
terrain profiles from the same fixed difficulty.
t=0

===== PAGE 5 =====
B. Adaptation Module Parameters Training Range Testing Range
The knowledge of privileged environment configuration e t Friction [0.05, 4.5] [0.04, 6.0]
and its encoded extrinsics vector z t are not accessible during K p [50, 60] [45, 65]
deployment in the real-world. Hence, we propose to estimate K [0.4, 0.8] [0.3, 0.9]
d
the extrinsics online using the adaptation module φ. Instead Payload (Kg) [0, 6] [0, 7]
of e t , the adaptation module uses the recent history of robot’s Center of Mass (cm) [-0.15, 0.15] [-0.18, 0.18]
states x t−k:t−1 and actions a t−k:t−1 to generate zˆ t which is Motor Strength [0.90, 1.10] [0.88, 1.22]
an estimate of the true extrinsics vector z t . In our experiments, Re-sample Probability 0.004 0.01
we use k = 50 which corresponds to 0.5s.
TABLE I: Ranges of the environmental parameters.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
zˆ = φ x ,a
t t−k:t−1 t−k:t−1
deployment of RMA on the real robot without the need for
Note that instead of predicting e t , which is the case in typical any synchronization or calibration of the two subsystems.
system identification, we directly estimate the extrinsics z t that This asynchronous design is fundamentally enabled by the
only encodes how the behavior should change to correct for decoupling of the relatively infrequently changing extrinsics
the given environment vector e t . vector with the quickly changing robot state.
To train the adaptation module, we just need the state-action
history and the target value of z
t
(given by the environmental IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
factor encoder µ). Both of these are available in simulation, and
A. Environment Details
hence, φ can be trained via supervised learning to minimize:
MSE(zˆ,z ) = (cid:107)zˆ − z (cid:107)2, where z = µ(e ). We model φ as Hardware Details: We use A1 robot from Unitree for all our
t t t t t t
real-world experiments. A1 is a relatively low cost medium
a 1-D CNN to capture temporal correlations (Section IV-B).
sized robotic quadruped dog. It has 18 degrees of freedom out
One way to collect the state-action history is to unroll the
of which 12 are actuated (3 motors on each leg) and weighs
trained base policy π with the ground truth z . However, such
t
about 12 kg. To measure the current state of the robot, we
a dataset will contain examples of only good trajectories where
use the joint position and velocity from the motor encoders,
the robot walks seamlessly. Adaptation module φ trained on
roll and pitch from the IMU sensor and the binarized foot
this data would not be robust to deviations from the expert
contact indicators from the foot sensors. The deployed policy
trajectory, which will happen often during deployment.
uses position control for the joints of the robots. The predicted
We resolve this problem by training φ with on-policy data
desired joint positions are converted to torque using a PD
(similar to Ross et al. [45]). We unroll the base policy π with
controller with fixed gains (K = 55 and K = 0.8).
the zˆ predicted by the randomly initialized policy φ. We then p d
t
use this state action history, paired with the ground truth z t Simulation Setup: We use the RaiSim simulator [22] for
to train φ. We iteratively repeat this until convergence. This rigid-body and contact dynamics simulation. We import the
training procedure ensures that RMA sees enough exploration A1 URDF file from Unitree [53] and use the inbuilt fractal
trajectories during training due to a) randomly initialized φ, terrain generator to generate uneven terrain (fractal octaves
and b) imperfect prediction of zˆ t . This adds robustness to the = 2, fractal lacunarity = 2.0, fractal gain = 0.25, z-scale =
performance of RMA during deployment. 0.27). Each RL episode lasts for a maximum of 1000 steps,
with early termination if the height of the robots drops below
C. Asynchronous Deployment
0.28m, magnitude of the body roll exceeds 0.4 radians or the
We train RMA completely in simulation and then deploy it in
pitch exceeds 0.2 radians. The control frequency of the policy
the real world without any modification or fine-tuning. The two
is 100 Hz, and the simulation time step is 0.025s.
subsystems of RMA run asynchronously and at substantially
different frequencies, and hence, can easily run using little State-Action Space: The state is 30 dimensional containing
on-board compute. The adaptation policy is slow because it the joint positions (12 values), joint velocities (12 values), roll
operates on the state-action history of 50 time steps, roughly and pitch of the torso and binary foot contact indicators (4
updating the extrinsic vector zˆ once every 0.1s (10 Hz). values). For actions, we use position control for the 12 robot
t
The base policy runs at 100 Hz and uses the most recent joints. RMA predicts the desired joint angles a = qˆ ∈ R12,
zˆ generated by the adaptation module, along with the current which is converted to torques τ using a PD controller: τ =
t (cid:16) (cid:17)
state and the previous action, to predict a t . This asynchronous K p (qˆ − q)+K d qˆ˙ − q˙ . K p and K d are manually-specified
execution doesn’t hurt performance in practice because zˆ t gains, and the target joint velocities qˆ˙ are set to 0.
changes relatively infrequently in the real world.
Alternately, we could have trained a base policy which Environmental Variations: All environmental variations with
directly takes the state and action history as input without their ranges are listed in Table I. Of these, e includes mass and
t
decoupling them into the two modules. We found that this (a) its position on the robot (3 dims), motor strength (12 dims),
leads to unnatural gaits and poor performance in simulation, friction (scalar) and local terrain height (scalar), making it a
(b) can only run at 10Hz on the on-board compute, and (c) 17-dim vector. Note that although the difficulty of the terrain
lacks the asynchronous design which is critical for a seamless profile is fixed, the local terrain height changes as the agent

===== PAGE 6 =====
Success TTF Distance Success
Uneven Foam Step Down-15
RMA 80 0.9 0.9 RMA 100
RMA w/o RMA w/o
0 0.1 0.1 0
Adapt Adapt
A1 20 0.36 0.36 A1 60
Upward Incline RMA 100 1 1 Step Up-6 RMA 100
RMA w/o RMA w/o
20 1 0.6 40
Adapt Adapt
A1 100 1 1 A1 80
Mattress RMA 100 1 1 Step Up-8 RMA 60
RMA w/o RMA w/o
0 1 0.25 0
Adapt Adapt
A1 100 1 1 A1 20
)%(
sseccuS
100
50
0
0 5 8 12
Payload (Kg)
FTT
1
0.5
0
0 5 8 12
Payload (Kg)
ecnatsiD
Payload 1
Analysis
0.5
0
0 5 8 12
Payload (Kg)
RMA RMA w/o Adapt A1
Fig. 3: We evaluate RMA in several out-of-distribution setups in the real world. We compare RMA to A1’s controller and
RMA without the adaptation module. We find that RMA steps down a height of 15cm with 80% success rate and walks over
unseen deformable surfaces, such as a memory foam mattress and a slightly uneven foam with 100% success rate. It is also
able to successfully climb inclines and steps. A1’s controller fails to walk over uneven foam. At the bottom, we also analyze
the payload carrying limits of the three methods. We see that the A1 controller’s performance starts degrading at 8Kg payload
capacity. RMA w/o adaptation fails to move for payloads more than 8Kg, but rarely falls. For reference, A1 robot weights 12Kg.
Overall, the proposed method consistently dominates the baseline methods. The numbers reported are averaged over 5 trials.
moves. We discretize the terrain height under each foot to the number, output channel number, kernel size, and stride of each
first decimal place and then take the maximum among the four layer are [32,32,8,4],[32,32,5,1],[32,32,5,1]. The flattened
feet to get a scalar. This ensures that the controller does not CNN output is linearly projected to estimate zˆ.
t
critically depend on a fast and accurate sensing of the local
terrain, and allows the base policy to use it asynchronously at Learning Base Policy and Environmental Factor Encoder
a much lower update frequency during deployment. Network: We jointly train the base policy and the environment
encoder network using PPO [48] for 15,000 iterations each
B. Training Details of which uses batch size of 80,000 split into 4 mini-batches.
Base Policy and Environment Factor Encoder Architecture: The learning rate is set to 5e−4. The coefficient of the reward
terms are provided in Section III. Training takes roughly 24
The base policy is a 3-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
which takes in the current state x ∈ R30, previous action hours on an ordinary desktop machine, with 1 GPU for policy
t
a ∈ R12 and the extrinsics vector z ∈ R8, and outputs training. In this duration, it simulates 1.2 billion steps.
t−1 t
12-dim target joint angles. The dimension of hidden layers is
Learning Adaptation Module: We train the adaptation mod-
128. The environment factor encoder is a 3-layer MLP (256,
ule using supervised learning with on-policy data. We use
128 hidden layer sizes) and encodes e ∈ R17 into z ∈ R8.
t t Adam optimizer [29] to minimize MSE loss. We run the
Adaptation Module Architecture: The adaptation module optimization process for 1000 iterations with a learning rate of
first embeds the recent states and actions into 32-dim repre- 5e−4 each of which uses a batch size of 80,000 split up into
sentations using a 2-layer MLP. Then, a 3-layer 1-D CNN 4 mini-batches. It takes 3 hours to train this on an ordinary
convolves the representations across the time dimension to desktop machine, with 1 GPU for training the policy. In this
capture temporal correlations in the input. The input channel duration, it simulates 80 million steps.

===== PAGE 7 =====
RL
RR
FL
FR
| | | | |
1 2 3 4 5
Default Gait Adaptation Recovered Gait
Time (s)
)mN(
euqroT
eenK
| | | | |
1 2 3 4 5 20—
10—
0—
0.5—
0—
| | | | |
1 2 3 4 5
eulav
z
,
z
5
1
Fig. 4: We analyze RMA as the robot walks over an oily plastic sheet with additional plastic covering on its feet. We plot
the torque of the knee and the gait pattern which indicates the contact of the four feet (F/R denotes Front/Rear and R/L
denotes Right/Left). The bottom plot shows median filtered 1st and 5th components of the extrinsics vector zˆ predicted by the
adaptation module. When the robot enters the slippery patch we see a change in the two components of the extrinsics vector zˆ,
indicating that the slip event has been detected by the adaptation module. Note that post adaptation, the recovered gait time
period is similar to the original, the torque magnitudes have increased and zˆ continues to capture the fact that the surface is
still slippery. RMA was successful in 90% of the runs over oily patch.
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 5) System Identification [57]: Instead of predicting zˆ t , we
directly predict the system parameters eˆ.
We compare the performance of RMA with several base- t
6) Advantage Weighted Regression for Domain Adaptation
lines in simulation (Table II). We additionally compare to
(AWR) [41]: Optimize zˆ offline using AWR by using
the manufacturer’s controller, which ships with A1, in the t
real-world rollouts of the policy in the testing environment.
real world indoor setups (Figure 3) and run RMA in the
wild in a very diverse set of terrains (Figure 1). Videos Learning baselines were trained with the same architecture,
at https://ashish-kmr.github.io/rma-legged-robots/ reward function and other hyper-parameters.
Baselines: We compare to the following baselines: Metrics: We compare the performance of RMA against
baselines using the following metrics: (1) time-to-fall divided
1) A1 Controller: The default robot manufacturer’s controller
by maximum episode length to get a normalized value between
which uses a force-based control scheme with MPC.
0 − 1 (TTF); (2) average forward reward, (3) success rate, (4)
2) Robustness through Domain Randomization (Robust): The
base policy is trained without z to be robust to the distance covered, (5) exploration samples needed for adaptation,
t
(6) torque applied, (7) smoothness which is derivative of torque
variations in the training range [52, 40].
and (7) ground impact (details in the supplementary).
3) Expert Adaptation Policy (Expert): In simulation, we can
use the true value of the extrinsics vector z . This is an
t
A. Indoor Experiments
upper bound to the performance of RMA.
4) RMA w/o Adaptation: We can also evaluate the perfor- In the real world, we compare RMA with A1’s controller
mance of the base policy without the adaptation module and with RMA without the adaptation module (Figure 3). We
to ablate the importance of the adaptation module. limit comparison to these two baselines to avoid damage to the

===== PAGE 8 =====
Success (%) TTF Reward Distance (m) Samples Torque Smoothness Ground Impact
Robust [52, 40] 62.4 0.80 4.62 1.13 0 527.59 122.50 4.20
SysID [57] 56.5 0.74 4.82 1.17 0 565.85 149.75 4.03
AWR [41] 41.7 0.65 4.17 0.95 40k 599.71 162.60 4.02
RMA w/o Adapt 52.1 0.75 4.72 1.15 0 524.18 106.25 4.55
RMA 73.5 0.85 5.22 1.34 0 500.00 92.85 4.27
Expert 76.2 0.86 5.23 1.35 0 485.07 85.56 3.90
TABLE II: Simulation Testing Results: We compare the performance of our method to baseline methods in simulation. Our
train and test settings are listed in Table I. We resample the environment parameters within an episode with a re-sampling
probability of 0.01 per step during testing. Baselines and metrics are defined in Section V. The numbers reported are averaged
over 3 randomly initialized policies and 1000 episodes per random initialization. RMA beats the performance of all the baselines,
with only a slight degradation in performance compared to the Expert.
robot hardware. We run 5 trials for each method and report the robot is successfully able to walk on sand, mud and dirt without
success rate, time to fall (TTF), and distance covered. Note that a single failure in all our trials. These terrains make locomotion
if a method drastically failed at a task, we only run two trials difficult due to sinking and sticking feet, which requires the
and then report a failure. This is done to minimize damage to robot to change the footholds dynamically to ensure stability.
the robot hardware. We have the following indoor setups: RMA had a 100% success rate for walking on tall vegetation
• n-kg Payload: Walk 300cm with n-kg payload on top. or crossing a bush. Such terrains obstruct the feet of the robot,
• StepUp-n: Step up on an n-cm high step. making it periodically unstable as it walks. To successfully
• Uneven Foam: Walk 180cm on a center elevated foam. walk in these setups, the robot has to stabilize against foot
• Mattress: Walk 60cm on a memory foam mattress. entanglements, and power through some of these obstructions
• StepDown-n: Step down an n-cm high step. aggressively. We also evaluate our robot on walking down
• Incline: Walk up on a 6-degrees incline. some stairs found on a hiking trail. The robot was successful
• Oily Surface: Cross through an an oily patch. in 70% of the trials, which is still remarkable given that the
robot never sees a staircase during training. And lastly, we
Each trial of StepUp-n and StepDown-n is terminated after
test the robot over construction debris, where it was successful
a success or a failure. Thus, we only report the success rate
100% of the times when walking downhill over a mud pile
for these tasks because other metrics are meaningless.
and 80% of the times when walking across a cement pile and
We observe that RMA achieves a high success rate in
a pile of pebbles. The cement pile and pebbles were itself on
all these setups, beating the performance of A1’s controller
a ground which was steeply sloping sideways, making it very
by a large margin in some cases. We find that turning off
challenging for the robot to go across the pile.
the adaptation module substantially degrades performance,
implying that the adaptation module is critical to solve these C. Simulation Results
tasks. A1’s controller struggled with uneven foam and with a
We compare the performance of our method to baseline
large step down and step up. The controller was destabilized
methods in simulation (Table II). We sample our training and
by unstable footholds in most of its failures. In the payload
testing parameters according to Table I, and resample them
analysis, the A1’s controller was able to handle higher than the
within an episode with a resampling probability of 0.004 and
advertised payload (5Kg), but starts sagging, and eventually
0.01 per step respectively for training and testing. The numbers
falls as the payload increases. In contrast, RMA maintains
reported are averaged over 3 randomly initialized policies
the height and is able to carry up to 12Kg (100% of body
and 1000 episodes per random initialization. RMA performs
weight) with a high success rate. RMA w/o adaptation mostly
the best with only a slight degradation compared to Expert’s
doesn’t fall, but also doesn’t move forward. We also evaluated
performance. The constantly changing environment leads to
RMA in a more challenging task of crossing an oily path with
poor performance of AWR which is very slow to adapt. Since
plastic wrapped feet. The robot successfully walks across the
the Robust baseline is agnostic to extrinsics, it learns a very
oily patch. Interestingly, RMA w/o adaptation was able to
conservative policy which loses on performance. Note that the
walk successfully on wooden floor without any fine-tuning or
low performance of SysID implies that explicitly estimating e
t
simulation calibration. This is in contrast to existing methods
is difficult and unnecessary to achieve superior performance.
which calibrate the simulation [51, 23] or fine-tune their policy
We also compare to RMA w/o adaptation, which shows a
at test time [41] even for flat and static environments.
significant performance drop without the adaption module.
B. Outdoor Experiments D. Adaptation Analysis
We demonstrate the performance of RMA on several We analyze the gait patterns, torque profiles and the estimated
challenging outdoor environments as shown in Figure 1. The extrinsics vector zˆ for adaptation over slippery surface (Figure
t

===== PAGE 9 =====
4). We pour oil on the plastic surface on the ground and for the bipedal robot cassie. In Robotics: Science and
additionally cover the feet of the robot in plastic. The robot Systems, 2018. 3
then tries to cross the slippery patch and is able to successfully [4] Monica Barragan, Nikolai Flowers, and Aaron M. Johnson.
adapt to it. We found that RMA was successful in 90% of the MiniRHex: A small, open-source, fully programmable
runs over oily patch. For one such trial, we plot the torque walking hexapod. In Robotics: Science and Systems
profile of the knee, the gait pattern, and median filtered 1st Workshop on “Design and Control of Small Legged
and 5th components of the extrinsics vector zˆ in Figure Robots”, 2018. 3
t
4. When the robot first starts slipping somewhere around [5] Gerardo Bledt, Matthew J Powell, Benjamin Katz, Jared
2s, the slip disturbs the regular motion of the robot, after Di Carlo, Patrick M Wensing, and Sangbae Kim. Mit chee-
which it enters the adaptation phase. This is noticeable in the tah 3: Design and control of a robust, dynamic quadruped
plotted components of the extrinsics vector which change in robot. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
response to the slip. This detected slip enables the robot to Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2018. 3
recover and continue walking over the slippery patch. Note [6] Adrian Boeing and Thomas Bra¨unl. Leveraging multiple
that although post adaptation, the torque stabilizes to a slightly simulators for crossing the reality gap. In 2012 12th
higher magnitude and the gait time period is roughly recovered, International Conference on Control Automation Robotics
the extrinsics vector does not recover and continues to capture & Vision (ICARCV). IEEE, 2012. 3
the fact that the surface is slippery. See supplementary more [7] Josh C Bongard and Hod Lipson. Nonlinear system
such analysis. identification using coevolution of models and tests. IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 2005. 3
VI. CONCLUSION [8] Roberto Calandra, Andre´ Seyfarth, Jan Peters, and
Marc Peter Deisenroth. Bayesian optimization for learning
We presented the RMA algorithm for real-time adaptation
gaits under uncertainty. Annals of Mathematics and
of a legged robot walking in a variety of terrains. No
Artificial Intelligence, 2016. 3
demonstrations or predefined motion templates were needed.
[9] Krzysztof Choromanski, Atil Iscen, Vikas Sindhwani,
Despite only having access to proprioceptive data, the robot
Jie Tan, and Erwin Coumans. Optimizing simulations
can also go downstairs and walk across rocks. However, a blind
with noise-tolerant structured exploration. In 2018 IEEE
robot has limitations. Larger perturbations such as sudden falls
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
while going downstairs, or due to multiple leg obstructions
(ICRA). IEEE, 2018. 3
from rocks, sometimes lead to failures. To develop a truly
[10] Ignasi Clavera, Anusha Nagabandi, Simin Liu, Ronald S.
reliable walking robot, we need to use not just proprioception
Fearing, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
but also exteroception with an onboard vision sensor. The
Learning to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments
importance of vision in guiding long range, rapid locomotion
through meta-reinforcement learning. In International
has been well studied, e.g. by [35], and this is an important
Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. 4
direction for future work.
[11] Martin De Lasa, Igor Mordatch, and Aaron Hertzmann.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Feature-based locomotion controllers. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG), 2010. 3
We would like to thank Jemin Hwangbo for helping with the
[12] Jared Di Carlo, Patrick M Wensing, Benjamin Katz,
simulation platform, and Koushil Sreenath and Stuart Anderson
Gerardo Bledt, and Sangbae Kim. Dynamic locomotion
for helpful feedback during the course of this project. We would
in the mit cheetah 3 through convex model-predictive
also like to thank Claire Tomlin, Shankar Sastry, Chris Atkeson,
control. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Aravind Sivakumar, Ilija Radosavovic and Russell Mendonca
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2018. 3
for their high quality feedback on the paper. This research was
[13] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-
part of a BAIR-FAIR collaborative project, and recently also
agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep net-
supported by the DARPA Machine Common Sense program.
works. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2017. 4
REFERENCES
[14] Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Address-
[1] MYM Ahmed and N Qin. Surrogate-based aerodynamic ing function approximation error in actor-critic methods.
design optimization: Use of surrogates in aerodynamic In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
design optimization. In International Conference on 2018. 3
Aerospace Sciences and Aviation Technology, 2009. 3 [15] Christian Gehring, Stelian Coros, Marco Hutter,
[2] Aaron D Ames, Kevin Galloway, Koushil Sreenath, and Carmine Dario Bellicoso, Huub Heijnen, Remo Diethelm,
Jessy W Grizzle. Rapidly exponentially stabilizing control Michael Bloesch, Pe´ter Fankhauser, Jemin Hwangbo,
lyapunov functions and hybrid zero dynamics. IEEE Mark Hoepflinger, et al. Practice makes perfect: An
Transactions on Automatic Control, 2014. 1, 3 optimization-based approach to controlling agile motions
[3] Taylor Apgar, Patrick Clary, Kevin Green, Alan Fern, and for a quadruped robot. IEEE Robotics & Automation
Jonathan W Hurst. Fast online trajectory optimization Magazine, 2016. 3

===== PAGE 10 =====
[16] Hartmut Geyer, Andre Seyfarth, and Reinhard Blickhan. Autonomous Systems, 2013. 1, 3
Positive force feedback in bouncing gaits? Proceedings [29] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological stochastic optimization. In 3rd International Conference
Sciences, 2003. 1, 3 on Learning Representations, 2015. 6, 12
[17] Xiaoxiao Guo, Wei Li, and Francesco Iorio. Convolutional [30] Jens Kober, J Andrew Bagnell, and Jan Peters. Reinforce-
neural networks for steady flow approximation. In ment learning in robotics: A survey. The International
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international Journal of Robotics Research, 2013. 3
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 2016. [31] Sylvain Koos, Jean-Baptiste Mouret, and Ste´phane Don-
3 cieux. Crossing the reality gap in evolutionary robotics
[18] Tuomas Haarnoja, Sehoon Ha, Aurick Zhou, Jie Tan, by promoting transferable controllers. In Proceedings of
George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Learning to walk via the 12th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary
deep reinforcement learning. In Robotics: Science and computation, 2010. 3
Systems, 2019. 1, 3 [32] Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen
[19] Josiah Hanna and Peter Stone. Grounded action transfor- Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning quadrupedal loco-
mation for robot learning in simulation. In Proceedings motion over challenging terrain. Science robotics, 2020.
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017. 1, 3, 4
4 [33] Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel,
[20] Marco Hutter, Christian Gehring, Dominic Jud, Andreas Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver,
Lauber, C Dario Bellicoso, Vassilios Tsounis, Jemin and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep
Hwangbo, Karen Bodie, Peter Fankhauser, Michael reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2016. 3
Bloesch, et al. Anymal-a highly mobile and dynamic [34] Jingru Luo and Kris Hauser. Robust trajectory opti-
quadrupedal robot. In 2016 IEEE/RSJ International mization under frictional contact with iterative learning.
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). Autonomous Robots, 2017. 4
IEEE, 2016. 3 [35] Jonathan Samir Matthis, Jacob L Yates, and Mary M
[21] Jemin Hwangbo. RaisimGymTorch. https://raisim.com/ Hayhoe. Gaze and the control of foot placement when
sections/RaisimGymTorch.html, 2020-2021. 12 walking in natural terrain. Current Biology, 2018. 9
[22] Jemin Hwangbo, Joonho Lee, and Marco Hutter. Per- [36] Hirofumi Miura and Isao Shimoyama. Dynamic walk of
contact iteration method for solving contact dynamics. a biped. The International Journal of Robotics Research,
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2018. URL www. 1984. 1, 3
raisim.com. 5 [37] Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi
[23] Jemin Hwangbo, Joonho Lee, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Dario Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley,
Bellicoso, Vassilios Tsounis, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous
Hutter. Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International
legged robots. Science Robotics, 2019. 1, 3, 4, 8, 12 conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2016. 3
[24] Dong Jin Hyun, Jongwoo Lee, SangIn Park, and Sangbae [38] Ofir Nachum, Michael Ahn, Hugo Ponte, Shixiang Shane
Kim. Implementation of trot-to-gallop transition and Gu, and Vikash Kumar. Multi-agent manipulation via
subsequent gallop on the mit cheetah i. The International locomotion using hierarchical sim2real. In Conference
Journal of Robotics Research, 2016. 1, 3 on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2020. 4
[25] Atil Iscen, Ken Caluwaerts, Jie Tan, Tingnan Zhang, Er- [39] Michael Neunert, Thiago Boaventura, and Jonas Buchli.
win Coumans, Vikas Sindhwani, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Why off-the-shelf physics simulators fail in evaluat-
Policies modulating trajectory generators. In Conference ing feedback controller performance-a case study for
on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2018. 3 quadrupedal robots. In Advances in Cooperative Robotics.
[26] Aaron M Johnson, Thomas Libby, Evan Chang-Siu, World Scientific, 2017. 3
Masayoshi Tomizuka, Robert J Full, and Daniel E [40] Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba,
Koditschek. Tail assisted dynamic self righting. In and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control
Adaptive Mobile Robotics. World Scientific, 2012. 1, with dynamics randomization. In 2018 IEEE international
3 conference on robotics and automation (ICRA). IEEE,
[27] Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Jonas Buchli, Peter Pastor, Michael 2018. 1, 4, 7, 8
Mistry, and Stefan Schaal. Fast, robust quadruped [41] Xue Bin Peng, Erwin Coumans, Tingnan Zhang, Tsang-
locomotion over challenging terrain. In 2010 IEEE Wei Edward Lee, Jie Tan, and Sergey Levine. Learning
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. agile robotic locomotion skills by imitating animals. In
IEEE, 2010. 3 Robotics: Science and Systems, 2020. 1, 3, 4, 7, 8
[28] Mahdi Khoramshahi, Hamed Jalaly Bidgoly, Soroosh [42] Delyle T Polet and John EA Bertram. An inelastic
Shafiee, Ali Asaei, Auke Jan Ijspeert, and Majid Nili quadrupedal model discovers four-beat walking, two-beat
Ahmadabadi. Piecewise linear spine for speed–energy running, and pseudo-elastic actuation as energetically
efficiency trade-off in quadruped robots. Robotics and optimal. PLoS computational biology, 2019. 4

===== PAGE 11 =====
[43] Marc H Raibert. Hopping in legged systems—modeling on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2020. 1, 3
and simulation for the two-dimensional one-legged case. [56] KangKang Yin, Kevin Loken, and Michiel Van de Panne.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Simbicon: Simple biped locomotion control. ACM
1984. 1, 3 Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2007. 1, 3
[44] Nathan Ratliff, Matt Zucker, J Andrew Bagnell, and [57] Wenhao Yu, Jie Tan, C. Karen Liu, and Greg Turk.
Siddhartha Srinivasa. Chomp: Gradient optimization Preparing for the unknown: Learning a universal policy
techniques for efficient motion planning. In 2009 IEEE with online system identification. In Robotics: Science
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. and Systems, 2017. 3, 4, 7, 8
IEEE, 2009. 3 [58] Wenhao Yu, C Karen Liu, and Greg Turk. Policy transfer
[45] Ste´phane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A with strategy optimization. In International Conference
reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to on Learning Representations, 2018. 4
no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth [59] Wenhao Yu, Visak C. V. Kumar, Greg Turk, and C. Karen
international conference on artificial intelligence and Liu. Sim-to-real transfer for biped locomotion. In 2019
statistics, 2011. 5 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
[46] Uluc Saranli, Martin Buehler, and Daniel E Koditschek. and Systems. IEEE, 2019. 4
Rhex: A simple and highly mobile hexapod robot. The [60] Wenhao Yu, Jie Tan, Yunfei Bai, Erwin Coumans, and
International Journal of Robotics Research, 2001. 1 Sehoon Ha. Learning fast adaptation with meta strategy
[47] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. optimization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional continuous 2020. 4
control using generalized advantage estimation. In 4th [61] Wenxuan Zhou, Lerrel Pinto, and Abhinav Gupta. Envi-
International Conference on Learning Representations, ronment probing interaction policies. In 7th International
2016. 12 Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019,
[48] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec 2019. 4
Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization [62] J Zico Kolter and Andrew Y Ng. The stanford littledog:
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. 3, 6, A learning and rapid replanning approach to quadruped
12 locomotion. The International Journal of Robotics
[49] Xingyou Song, Yuxiang Yang, Krzysztof Choromanski, Research, 2011. 3
Ken Caluwaerts, Wenbo Gao, Chelsea Finn, and Jie [63] Matt Zucker, J Andrew Bagnell, Christopher G Atke-
Tan. Rapidly adaptable legged robots via evolutionary son, and James Kuffner. An optimization approach to
meta-learning. In International Conference on Intelligent rough terrain locomotion. In 2010 IEEE International
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2020. 4 Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 2010. 1,
[50] Koushil Sreenath, Hae-Won Park, Ioannis Poulakakis, 3
and Jessy W Grizzle. A compliant hybrid zero dynamics [64] Matt Zucker, Nathan Ratliff, Martin Stolle, Joel Chestnutt,
controller for stable, efficient and fast bipedal walking on J Andrew Bagnell, Christopher G Atkeson, and James
mabel. The International Journal of Robotics Research, Kuffner. Optimization and learning for rough terrain
2011. 1, 3 legged locomotion. The International Journal of Robotics
[51] Jie Tan, Tingnan Zhang, Erwin Coumans, Atil Iscen, Research, 2011. 3
Yunfei Bai, Danijar Hafner, Steven Bohez, and Vincent
Vanhoucke. Sim-to-real: Learning agile locomotion for
quadruped robots. In Robotics: Science and Systems,
2018. 4, 8
[52] Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Woj-
ciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain randomization
for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to
the real world. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference
on intelligent robots and systems (IROS). IEEE, 2017. 1,
4, 7, 8
[53] Xingxing Wang. Unitree Robotics. https://www.unitree.
com/. 5
[54] Zhaoming Xie, Xingye Da, Michiel van de Panne, Buck
Babich, and Animesh Garg. Dynamics randomization
revisited: A case study for quadrupedal locomotion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2011.02404, 2020. 4
[55] Yuxiang Yang, Ken Caluwaerts, Atil Iscen, Tingnan
Zhang, Jie Tan, and Vikas Sindhwani. Data efficient
reinforcement learning for legged robots. In Conference

===== PAGE 12 =====
Supplementary for
RMA: Rapid Motor Adaptation for Legged Robots
S1. METRICS Algorithm 1: Rapid Motor AdaptationTraining
We use several metrics (in SI units) to evaluate and compare Phase 1 Randomly initialize the base policy π;
the performance of RMA against baselines: Randomly initialize the environmental factor encoder
µ; Empty replay buffer D ;
• Success Rate: Average rate of successfully completing the 1
for 0 ≤ itr ≤ N1 do
task as defined in the next section. itr
for 0 ≤ i ≤ N do
• Time to Fall (TTF): Measures the time before a fall. We env
x ,e ← envs[i].reset();
divide it by the maximum duration of the episode and 0 0
for 0 ≤ t ≤ T do
report a normalized value between 0 and 1.
z ← µ(e );
• Reward: Average step forward reward plus lateral reward t t
a ← π(x ,a ,z );
over multiple episodes as defined in Section III-A RL t t t−1 t
x ,e ,r ← envs[i].step(a );
Rewards of the main paper. t+1 t+1 t t
Store ((x ,e ),a ,r ,(x ,e )) in D ;
• Distance: Average distance covered in an episode. For t t t t t+1 t+1 1
end
real-world experiments, we report the normalized distance,
end
where we normalize by the maximum distance which is
Update π and µ using PPO [48];
specific to the task.
Empty D ;
• Adaptation Samples: Number of control steps to explore 1
end
in the testing environment needed for the motor policy to
adapt.
Phase 2 Randomly initialize the adaptation module φ
• Torque: Squared L2 norm of torques at every joint (cid:107)τt(cid:107)2.
parameterized by θ ; Empty mini-batch D ;
• Jerk: Squared L2 norm of delta torques (cid:107)τt − τt−1(cid:107)2. φ 2
for 0 ≤ itr ≤ N2 do
• Ground Impact: Squared L2 norm of delta ground reaction itr
for 0 ≤ i ≤ N do
forces at every foot (cid:107)ft − ft−1(cid:107)2. env
x ,e ← envs[i].reset();
0 0
S1. ADDITIONAL TRAINING AND DEPLOYMENT DETAILS for 0 ≤ t ≤ T do
zˆ ← φ(x ,a );
t t−k:k t−k−1:k−1
The training pipeline is shown in Algorithm 1, and the
z ← µ(e );
t t
deployment pipeline is shown in Algorithm 2.
a ← π(x ,a ,zˆ);
t t t−1 t
We use PPO [48] to train the base policy and the envi-
x ,e , ← envs[i].step(a );
t+1 t+1 t
ronmental factor encoder. We train for total 15,000 iterations.
Store (zˆ,z ) in D ;
t t 2
During each iteration, we collect a batch of 80,000 state-action
end
transitions, which is evenly divided into 4 mini-batches. Each
end
mini-batch is fed into the base policy and the Environment θ ← θ − λ ∇ 1 (cid:80) (cid:107)zˆ − z (cid:107)2;
Factor Encoder in sequence for 4 rounds to compute the loss φ φ θφ θφ TNenv t t
Empty D ;
2
and error back-propagation. The loss is the sum of surrogate
end
policy loss and 0.5 times the value loss. We clip the action log
probability ratios between 0.8 and 1.2, and clip the target values
to be within the 0.8 − 1.2 times range of the corresponding
old values. We exclude the entropy regularization of the base with a very small k 0 set to 0.03, and then exponentially increase
policy, but constrain the standard deviation of the parameterized the these coefficients using a fixed curriculum: k t+1 = k t 0.997,
Gaussian action space to be large than 0.2 to ensure exploration. where t is the iteration number. The learning process is shown
λ and γ in the generalization advantage estimation [47] are set in Figure S2.
to 0.95 and 0.998 respectively. We use the Adam optimizer
[29], where we set the learning rate to 5e−4, β to (0.9,0.999),
S1. ADDITIONAL REAL-WORLD ADAPTATION ANAYLSIS
and (cid:15) to 1e−8. The reference implementation can be found in In addition to the oil-walking experiments in Figure 4 of the
the RaisimGymTorch Library [21]. main paper, we also analyze the gait patterns and the torque
If we naively train our agent with the reward function profile for the mass adaptation case, shown in Figure S3. We
aggregating all the terms, it learns to fall because of the penalty throw a payload of 5kg on the back of the robot in the middle
terms. To prevent this collapse, we follow the strategy described of a run and plot the torque profile of the knee, gait pattern,
in [23]. In addition the scaling factors of all reward terms, we and the 2th and 7th components of the extrinsics vector zˆ as
t
apply a small multiplier k to the penalty terms 3 − 10, as shown in Figure S3. We observe that the additional payload
t
defined in Section III-A of the main paper. We start the training disturbs the regular motion of the robot, after which it enters

===== PAGE 13 =====
Algorithm 2: Rapid Motor AdaptationDeployment
Process 1 operating at 100 Hz;
t ← 0;
while not fall do
a ← π(x ,a ,zˆ );
t t t−1 async
x ← env.step(a );
t+1 t
t ← t + 1;
end
Process 2 operating at 10 Hz;
while not fall do
zˆ ← φ(x ,a );
async t−k:k t−k−1:k−1
end
the adaptation phase and finally recovers from the disturbance.
When the payload lands on the robot, it is noticeable that the
plotted components of the extrinsics vector change in response
to the slip. Post adaptation, we see that the torque stabilizes
to a higher magnitude than before to account for the payload
and the gait time period is roughly recovered.
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0 5000 10000 15000
Number of Iterations
draweR
petS
egarevA
S2. ADDITIONAL SIMULATION TESTINGS
In Figure S4, we further test RMAin extreme simulated
environments and show its performance in three types of
environment variations: the payloads added on the base of
the A1 robot, the terrain elevation variation (z-scale used in
the fractual terrain generator, details in Section IV Simulation
Setup of the main paper), and the friction coefficient between
the robot feet and the terrain. We show the superiority of
RMAacross all the cases in terms of Success Rate, TTF and
Reward as defined in Section S1.
aggregate
forward + lateral
penalty terms
Fig. S2: We plot the average step reward during the total 15,000
training iterations. We show the converging trend of the reward
aggregating all reward terms, forward + lateral reward, and sum
of penalty terms. It also shows the necessity of applying a small
multiplier to the penalty terms at the beginning of training;
otherwise, the robot will only have negative experience initially
and unable to learn to walk quickly.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Fig. S3: We analyze the change in behavior of RMAas we throw a payload of 5kg on the back of the robot. As a note, we have
flipped the images so that that movement appears from left to right which is why the label on the sandbag appears to be 2Kg.
We plot the torque profile of the knee and the gait pattern. The bottom plot shows median filtered 2nd and 7th components of
the extrinsics vector zˆ predicted by the adaptation module. When the 5kg payload is thrown on the back of the robot, we see a
dip in the center of mass of the robot, which the adaptation module subsequently recovers from. In the bottom plot, we see a
jump in response in the plotted components of the estimated extrinsics vector, indicating that the additional payload has been
detected by the adaptation module. Note that post adaptation, the recovered gait time period is roughly similar to the original,
the torque magnitudes have increased and the extrinsics vector continues to capture the presence of the 5Kg payload on the
back of the robot.

===== PAGE 15 =====
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
sseccuS
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
FTT
6
5
4
3
2
1
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
Payload (kg)
draweR
RMA RMA w/o adapt DR SysID AWR Expert
0.250 0.275 0.300 0.325 0.350 0.375 0.400 0.8 0.2 0.05 0.0125
Terrain Height Variation (m) Friction Coefficient
Fig. S4: Simulation Generalization Results: We further compare the generalization performance of our method to baseline
methods in simulation. We pick three physics parameters that may vary to a large degree in the real world: the payload on
robot, the terrain height variation, and the friction coefficient between the robot feet and the terrain. We set other environment
parameters according to the training range in TABLE II of the main paper. Baselines and metrics are defined in Section V
of the main paper and Section S1. We report the mean and standard deviation of the performance of 3 randomly initialized
policies, which is characterized by the average of 100 testing trials in given settings. Despite no testing environment samples,
RMAperforms the best, the closest to Expert’s performance. For reference, A1 robot without additional payloads weighs 12 kg,
and is 0.35 m tall. The static friction coefficient between rubber and concrete is 1.00.