===== PAGE 1 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 1
Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal
robots in the wild
TAKAHIRO MIKI 1,*, JOONHO LEE 1, JEMIN HWANGBO 2, LORENZ WELLHAUSEN 1, VLADLEN KOLTUN 3, AND
MARCO HUTTER 1
1Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Lab, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
3Intelligent Systems Lab, Intel, Jackson, WY, USA.
*Corresponding author: tamiki@ethz.ch
Compiled January 21, 2022
Legged robots that can operate autonomously in remote and hazardous environments will greatly increase op-
portunities for exploration into under-explored areas. Exteroceptive perception is crucial for fast and energy-
efficient locomotion: perceiving the terrain before making contact with it enables planning and adaptation of
the gait ahead of time to maintain speed and stability. However, utilizing exteroceptive perception robustly for
locomotion has remained a grand challenge in robotics. Snow, vegetation, and water visually appear as obstacles
on which the robot cannot step – or are missing altogether due to high reflectance. Additionally, depth perception
can degrade due to difficult lighting, dust, fog, reflective or transparent surfaces, sensor occlusion, and more. For
this reason, the most robust and general solutions to legged locomotion to date rely solely on proprioception. This
severely limits locomotion speed, because the robot has to physically feel out the terrain before adapting its gait
accordingly. Here we present a robust and general solution to integrating exteroceptive and proprioceptive per-
ception for legged locomotion. We leverage an attention-based recurrent encoder that integrates proprioceptive
and exteroceptive input. The encoder is trained end-to-end and learns to seamlessly combine the different percep-
tion modalities without resorting to heuristics. The result is a legged locomotion controller with high robustness
and speed. The controller was tested in a variety of challenging natural and urban environments over multiple
seasons and completed an hour-long hike in the Alps in the time recommended for human hikers.
1. INTRODUCTION stereo matching and consequently struggle with low-texture surfaces
or when parts of the image are under or overexposed. Time of Flight
Legged robots can carry out missions in challenging environments that (ToF) cameras often fail to perceive dark surfaces and become noisy
are too far or too dangerous for humans, such as hazardous areas and under sunlight [13]. Generally, sensors which rely on light to infer
the surfaces of other planets. Legs can walk over challenging terrain distance are prone to producing artifacts on highly reflective surfaces,
with steep slopes, steps, and gaps that may impede wheeled or tracked sincethesensorsassumethatlighttravelsinastraightpath. Inaddition,
vehicles of similar size. There has been notable progress in legged depth sensors by nature cannot distinguish soft unstable surfaces such
robotics [1–5] and several commercial platforms are being deployed in as vegetation from rigid ones. An elevation map is commonly used to
the real world [6–10]. represent geometric terrain information extracted from depth sensor
However, until now, legged robots could not match the performance measurements [14–17]. It relies on the robot’s estimated pose and is
of animals in traversing challenging real-world terrain. Many legged therefore affected by errors in this estimate. Other common sources of
animals such as humans and dogs can briskly walk or run in such uncertainty in the map are occlusion or temporal inconsistency of the
environments by foreseeing the upcoming terrain and planning their measurements due to dynamic objects. Most existing methods that rely
footsteps based on visual information [11]. Animals naturally combine on onboard terrain perception are still vulnerable to these failures.
proprioception and exteroception to adapt to highly irregular terrain
Conventional approaches assume that the terrain information and
shape and surface properties such as slipperiness or softness, even
any uncertainties encoded in the map are reasonably accurate, and the
when visual perception is limited. Endowing legged robots with this
focus shifts solely to generating the motion. Offline methods use a pre-
ability is a grand challenge in robotics.
scannedterrainmap,computeahandcraftedcostfunctionoverthemap,
One of the biggest difficulties lies in reliable interpretation of in- and optimize a trajectory which is replayed on the robot [18, 19]. They
complete and noisy perception for control. Exteroceptive information assume perfect knowledge of the full terrain and robot states and plan
provided by onboard sensors is incomplete and often unreliable in real- complex motions with long planning times. Online methods generally
world environments. Stereo camera based depth sensors, which most employ a similar approach but use only onboard resources to construct
existing legged robots rely on [6, 9, 12], require texture to perform a map and continuously replan trajectories during execution [20–24].
2202
naJ
02
]OR.sc[
1v71180.1022:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 2
Fig. 1. Robust locomotion in the wild. The presented locomotion controller was extensively tested in a variety of complex environments over
multiple seasons. The controller overcame a whole spectrum of real-world challenges, often encountering them in combination. These include
slippery surfaces, steep inclinations, complex terrain, and vegetation in natural environments. In search-and-rescue scenarios, the controller
dealt with steep stairs, unknown payloads, and perception-degrading fog. Reflective surfaces, loose ground, low light, and water puddles were
encountered in underground cave systems. Soft and slippery snow piled up in the winter. The controller traversed these environments with zero
failures.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 3
Recently,fasterlocomotionhasbeenachievedbyreducingtheplanning environment. This privileged training enables the teacher policy to
time with heuristics [25–27] or using Convolutional Neural Networks discover the optimal behavior given perfect knowledge of the terrain.
(CNN) to calculate foothold cost more efficiently [27]. Recently, a We then train a student policy that only has access to information that
bipedal robot Atlas demonstrated parkour over complex obstacles [28]. is available in the field on the physical robot. The student policy is
It leverages pre-planned motion reference and optimizes its motion built around our belief state encoder and trained via imitation learning.
onlinebyutilizingonboardLiDARsensordata. Overall,thefocusofall The student policy learns to predict the teacher’s optimal action given
theapproachesmentionedaboveisonpickingfootholdsandgenerating only partial and noisy observations of the environment.
trajectories given accurate terrain information. Some works [14, 17] Once the student policy is trained, we deploy it on the robot without
representthestatisticaluncertaintyofthemeasurementsinthemap,but any fine-tuning. The controller gets onboard sensor observations and a
its use is limited to heuristically defined foot placement rules to avoid desired velocity command, and outputs each joint’s target position as
risky areas [24]. Such methods can only handle explicitly modeled the action. The robot perceives the environment by leveraging a robot-
uncertainties and are not robust to the variety of perception failures centric elevation map. The elevation map serves as an abstraction layer
encountered in the wild. between sensors and the locomotion controller, making our method
Data-driven methods have recently been introduced in order to independent of depth sensor choices. It works with no fine-tuning with
incorporate more complex dynamics without compromising real-time different sensors, such as stereo cameras or LiDAR. Since the policy
performance. Learning-based quadrupedal or bipedal locomotion for was trained to handle significant noise, bias, and gaps in the elevation
simulatedcharactershasbeenachievedbyusingreinforcementlearning map, the robot can continue walking even when mapping fails or the
(RL)[29–32]andrealisticrobotmodelswereusedinrecentworks[33]. sensors are physically broken.
However, these works were only conducted in simulation. Recently, The presented approach achieves substantial improvements over
RL based locomotion controllers have been successfully transferred the state of the art [4] in locomotion speed and obstacle traversability
to physical robots [3, 4, 34–40]. Hwangbo et al. [3, 41] realized while maintaining exceptional robustness. Our key contribution is a
quadrupedal locomotion and recovery on flat ground with a physical method for combining multi-modal perception and demonstrating with
robot by using learned actuator dynamics to facilitate simulation-to- extensive hardware experiments that the resulting control policy is
reality (sim-to-real) transfer. Lee et al. [4] extended this approach and robust against various exteroceptive failures. Handling exteroception
enabled rough-terrain locomotion by simulating challenging terrain in failures has been a challenging problem in robotics. Our approach
a privileged training setup with an adaptive curriculum. Peng et al. [35] constitutes a general framework for robust deployment of complex
used imitation learning to transfer animal motion to a legged robot. autonomous machines in the wild.
However, these methods do not use any visual information.
In order to add exteroceptive information to locomotion learning, 2. RESULTS
Gangapurwala et al. [42] combined a learning-based foothold planner
and a model-based whole-body motion controller to transfer policies to Fast and robust locomotion in the wild
the real world in a laboratory setting. Their applications are limited to We deployed our controller in a wide variety of terrain, as shown
rigid terrain with mostly flat surfaces and are still constrained in their in Figure 1 and Movie 1. This includes alpine, forest, underground,
deployment range. Their performance is tightly bound to the quality of and urban environments. The controller was consistently robust and
the map, which often becomes unreliable in the field. had zero falls during all deployments. Because of the exteroceptive
In both model-based and learning-based approaches, the assump- perception, the robot could anticipate the terrain and adapt its motion
tion of flawless map quality precludes the application of these methods to achieve fast and smooth walking. This was particularly notable
in uncontrolled outdoor environments. Handling uncertainties in ter- for structures that require high foot clearance, such as stairs and large
rain perception remains an open problem. Existing controllers avoid obstacles. Therobotwasabletoleverageexteroceptiveinputtoconquer
catastrophicfailuresbysimplyrefrainingfromusingvisualinformation terrainthatwasbeyondthecapabilitiesofpriorworkthatdidnotutilize
in outdoor environments [2, 4, 38] or by adding heuristically defined exteroception [4].
reflex rules [43, 44]. ANYmal successfully traversed challenging natural environments
Here we present a terrain-aware locomotion controller for withsteepinclination,slipperysurfaces,grass,andsnow(Figure1A-J).
quadrupedal robots that overcomes limitations of previous approaches The robot was robust in these conditions, even when occlusion and
and enables robust traversal of harsh natural terrain at unprecedented surface properties such as high reflectance impeded exteroception. Our
speeds (Movie 1). At its core, the controller is based on a principled controller was also robustly deployed in underground environments
solution to incorporating exteroceptive perception into locomotion with loose gravel, sand, dust, water, and limited illumination (Figure 1
control. K-N).
The key component is a recurrent encoder that combines proprio- Urban environments also present important challenges (Figure 1
ceptionandexteroceptionintoanintegratedbeliefstate. Theencoderis O-R). For traversing stairs, the state-of-the-art quadrupedal robot Spot
trained in simulation to capture ground-truth information about the ter- from Boston Dynamics requires that a dedicated mode is engaged, and
rain given exteroceptive observations that may be incomplete, biased, the robot must be properly oriented with respect to the stairs [p. 33 44].
and noisy. The belief state encoder is trained end-to-end to integrate In contrast, our controller does not require any special mode for stairs,
proprioceptive and exteroceptive data without resorting to heuristics. It and can traverse stairs natively in any direction and any orientation,
learns to take advantage of the foresight afforded by exteroception to such as sideways, diagonally, and turning around on the stairway. See
plan footholds and accelerate locomotion when exteroception is reli- Movie S1 for demonstrations of smooth and robust stair traversal in
able, and can seamlessly fall back to robust proprioceptive locomotion arbitrary direction with our controller.
when needed. The learned controller thus combines the best of both The controller was also robust to combinations of different chal-
worlds: the speed and efficiency afforded by exteroception and the lenges, as can be seen with snow on stairs in Figure 1R. Snow makes
robustness of proprioception. stairs slippery and yields incomplete and erroneous exteroceptive data.
The controller is trained via privileged learning [45]. We first train Depth sensors either fail due to the high reflectivity of snow, or esti-
a teacher policy via Reinforcement Learning (RL) with full access mate the surface profile to be on top of the snow, whereas the robot’s
to privileged information in the form of the ground-truth state of the legs sink below this level. Foot slippage in snow can also cause large

===== PAGE 4 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 4
Fig. 2. A hike on the Etzel mountain in Switzerland, completed by ANYmal with our locomotion controller. The 2.2km route – with 120m of
elevation gain and inclinations up to 38% – encompasses a variety of challenging terrain. ANYmal reached the summit faster than the human
time indicated in the official signage, and finished the entire route in virtually the same time as given by a hiking guide [46].

===== PAGE 5 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 5
drift in the kinematic pose estimation [47], making the map even more structures were occluded and not presented in the map, which was
inconsistent. Nevertheless, the controller remained consistently robust, especially problematic during uphill walking (Figure 3G).
with zero failures in this regime as well. Overall, our controller could handle all of these challenging condi-
tions gracefully, without a single failure. The belief state estimator was
A hike in the Alps trained to assess the reliability of exteroceptive information and made
use of it to the extent possible. When exteroceptive information was
To further evaluate the robustness of our controller, we conducted
incomplete, noisy, or misleading, the controller could always grace-
a hiking experiment in which we tested if ANYmal could complete
fully degrade to proprioceptive locomotion, which was shown to be
an hour-long hiking loop on the Etzel mountain in Switzerland. The
robust [4]. The controller thus aims to achieve the best of both worlds:
hiking route was 2.2 km long, with an elevation gain of 120 m. Com-
achieving fast predictive locomotion when exteroceptive information is
pleting the trail required traversing steep inclinations, high steps, rocky
informative, but seamlessly retaining the robustness of proprioceptive
surfaces, slippery ground, and tree roots (Figure 2). As seen in Movie
control when it is not.
2, ANYmal completed the entire hike without any failure, stopping
only to fix a detached shoe and swap batteries. The robot was able
to reach the summit in 31 minutes, which is faster than the expected Evaluating the contribution of exteroception
human hiking duration indicated in the official signage (35 minutes
We conducted controlled experiments to quantitatively evaluate the
as shown in Figure 2), and finished the entire path in 78 minutes –
contribution of exteroception. We compared our controller to a propri-
virtually the same duration suggested by a hiking planner (76 minutes),
oceptive baseline [4] that does not use exteroception.
which rates the hike “difficult” [46]. The difficulty levels are chosen
First, we compared the success rate of overcoming fixed-height
from “easy”, “moderate”, and “difficult”, calculated by combining the
steps as shown in Figure 4A. Wooden steps of various height (from 12
required fitness level, sport type, and the technical complexity [48].
cm to 36.5 cm) were placed ahead of the robot, which performed 10
During the hike, the controller faced various challenges. The as-
trials to overcome each step with a fixed velocity command. A trial
cending path reached inclinations of up to 38% with rocky and wet
was considered successful if the robot overcomes the step within 5
surfaces (Figure 2 (B-C)). On the descent through a forest, tree roots
seconds.
formed intricate obstacles and the ground proved very slippery (Figure
The success rate of the proprioceptive baseline dropped at 20 cm
2 (G-H)).
step height when the front legs started frequently getting stuck at the
Vegetation above the robot sometimes introduced severe artifacts
step (Figure 4B). Even when the front legs successfully overcame
into the estimated elevation map. Despite all the challenges, the robot
the step, the hind legs often failed to fully step up. In contrast, our
finished the hike without any human help and without a single fall.
controller reliably traversed steps of up to 30.5 cm in height. Since
our controller could anticipate the step, it lifted its legs higher without
Exteroceptive challenges makingphysicalcontactfirst,andleaneditsbodyforwardtoletthehind
In this section, we examine how the terrain was perceived by the leg swing over the step (Figure 4A). Until this height, the dominating
robot in conditions that are challenging for exteroception. The robot failurereasonwastherobotevadingthestepsidewaysinsteadoffalling.
perceives the environment in the form of height samples from an When approaching steps higher than 32 cm, our controller hesitated
elevation map constructed from point cloud input, as seen in Figure 3A. to walk forward because it learned that steps of such height are at or
We used LiDAR in some experiments (Figure 3D-G) and active stereo above the robot’s physical limits and are likely to incur a high cost.
cameras in others (Figure 3B,C) to test the robustness of the controller We also tested the two controllers in an obstacle course, as shown
to the sensing modality. in Figure 4C,D. In this experiment, the robot was given a fixed path
We encountered many circumstances in which exteroception pro- over the obstacles and tracked it using a pure pursuit controller [49].
vides incomplete or misleading input. As shown in Figure 3 B-G, the The path traverses several types of obstacles – an inclined platform, a
estimated elevation map can unreliable due to sensing failures, limita- raised platform, stairs, and a pile of blocks. The platforms are 20 cm
tions of the 2.5D height map representation, or viewpoint restrictions high, the stairs are 17 cm high and 29 cm deep each, and the blocks
due to onboard sensing. are each 20 cm in both height and depth. Our controller followed the
Since most depth sensors rely on light to infer distance, either given path smoothly without any assistance, as shown in Figure 4C.
through time-of-flight measurements or stereo disparity, they com- The exteroceptive perception provided advance information on the
monly struggle with reflective or translucent surfaces.Figure 3B shows upcomingobstacles,allowingthecontrollertoadjusttherobot’smotion
such a sensing failure, where the reflective metal floor induced large before it made contact with the obstacles, facilitating fast and smooth
depth outliers which appear as a trench in the elevation map. Figure motion through the obstacle course. The baseline, on the other hand,
3C shows a sensing failure in the presence of snow. Since snow is failed to track the path without human assistance. During execution, it
highly reflective and has very little texture, stereo cameras could not got stuck on all three obstacles and we had to lift and push the robot to
infer depth, which lead to an empty map. continue the experiment (Figure 4D).
The 2.5D elevation map representation cannot accurately represent In addition, we measured the maximum locomotion speed of both
overhanging objects such as tree branches or low ceilings [17]. These controllers over flat ground and in the presence of obstacles. Figure
were integrated into the height field and were misrepresented as tall 4E shows the experimental setup. We gave the controller a constant
obstacles (Figure 3D). In addition, because the map cannot distinguish forward, lateral, or turning command and recorded the velocity on
between rigid or soft materials, the map gave misleading information flat ground and over a 20 cm step. Note that the baseline controller
in soft vegetation or deep snow (Figure 3E). only receives a directional command and learns to walk as fast as
Slippery or deformable surfaces caused odometry drift because possible in the commanded direction [4]. Our controller walked at 1.2
they violate the assumption of stable footholds, commonly adopted by m/s, while the baseline could only achieve 0.6 m/s on flat ground in
kinematic pose estimators [47]. Since map construction relies on such both the forward and lateral directions. The difference became even
pose estimation to register consecutive input point clouds, the map more pronounced over the obstacle. Our controller could traverse
became inaccurate in such circumstances (Figure 3F). Furthermore, the obstacle without any notable slow-down, while the baseline was
since the sensors were only located on the robot itself, areas behind stymied. The turning velocity showed the biggest difference between

===== PAGE 6 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 6
A
B Reflective ground E Non rigid obstacles
C Deep snow F Pose estimation drift
D Overhanging objects G Occlusion
Fig. 3. Our locomotion controller perceives the environment through height samples (red dots) from an elevation map (A). The controller is ro-
bust to many perception challenges commonly encountered in the field: missing map information due to sensing failure (B, C, G) and misleading
map information due to non-rigid terrain (D, E) and pose estimation drift (F).

===== PAGE 7 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 7
A ours B
command
27cm
baseline
command
22cm
C D
29 sec.
111222 ssseeeccc...
2288 sseecc.. 63 sec.
99 sseecc..
7 sec.
44 sseecc..
Ours 0000 sssseeeecccc.... Baseline
Time to complete Time to complete
33 sec. 75 sec. with help
E ours F baseline
G command command
command command command command
20 cm step 20 cm step
20 cm step
H

===== PAGE 8 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 8
the baseline policy and ours. Our controller could turn at 3 rad/s while locomotion. The controller remains robust in all conditions, including
the baseline policy could only turn at 0.6 rad/s: a five-fold difference. when the robot is effectively blind. The integration of exteroceptive
These results show clear gains by our controller over the propri- and proprioceptive inputs is learned end-to-end and does not require
oceptive baseline. Exteroception enabled our controller to traverse any hand-coded rules or heuristics. The result is the first rough-terrain
challenging environments more successfully and at higher speeds in legged locomotion controller that combines the speed and grace of
comparison to pure proprioception. Further quantitative performance vision-based locomotion with the high robustness of proprioception.
evaluation is provided in the supplementary section S2. This combination of speed and high robustness has been validated
through controlled experiments and extensive deployments in the
Evaluating robustness with belief state visualization wild, including an hour-long hiking route in the Alps that is rated
To examine how our controller integrates proprioception and extero- “difficult"[46]. The entire route was completed by the robot without
ception, we conducted a number of controlled experiments. We tested humanassistance(otherthanreattachingadetachedshoeandswapping
with two types of obstacles that provide ambiguous or misleading exte- the batteries), in the recommended time for completion of this route by
roceptive input: an opaque foam obstacle that appears solid but cannot human hikers.
support a foothold, and a solid but transparent obstacle. We placed Our work expands the operational domain of legged robots and
each obstacle ahead of the robot and commanded the robot to walk opens up new frontiers in autonomous navigation. Navigation plan-
forward at a constant velocity. ners no longer need to identify ground type or to switch modes dur-
The sensors perceived the foam block as solid and the robot conse- ing autonomous operation. Our controller was used as the default
quently prepared to step on it but could not achieve a stable foothold controller in the DARPA Subterranean Challenge missions of team
due to the deformation of the foam. Figure 5A shows how the internal Cerberus [50, 51] which has won the first prize in the finals [52]. In
belief state (blue) was revised as the robot encounters the misleading this challenge, our controller drove ANYmals to operate autonomously
obstacle: the controller initially trusted the exteroceptive input (red) over extended periods of time in underground environments with rough
but quickly revised its estimate of terrain height upon contact. Once terrain, obstructions, and degraded sensing in the presence of dust,
the correct belief had been formed, it was retained even after the foot fog, water, and smoke [53]. Our controller played a crucial role as it
left the ground, showing that the controller retains past information enabled four ANYmals to explore over 1700m in all three types of
due to its recurrent structure. courses – tunnel, urban, and cave – without a single fall.
The transparent obstacle is a block made of clear, acrylic plates,
which are not accurately perceived by the onboard sensors (Figure 5B). Possible extensions
The robot therefore walked as if it were on flat ground until it made
Future work could explicitly utilize the uncertainty information in the
contact with the step, at which point it revised its estimate of terrain
belief state. Currently, the policy uses uncertainty only implicitly to
profile upwards and changed its gait accordingly.
estimate the terrain. For example, in front of narrow cliff or a stepping
In the next experiment we simulated complete exteroception failure
stone, the elevation map does not provide sufficient information due
by physically covering the sensors, thus making them fully uninfor-
to occlusion. Therefore, the policy assumes a continuous surface and,
mative (Figure 5C,D). The robot was commanded to walk up and
as a result, the robot might step off and fall. Explicitly estimating
down two steps of stairs. With an unobstructed sensor, the controller
uncertainty may allow the policy to become more careful when exte-
traversed the stairs gracefully, without any unintended contact with
roceptive input is unreliable, for example using its foot to probe the
the stair risers, adjusting its footholds and body posture to step down
ground if it is unsure about it. In addition, our current implementation
the stairs softly. When the sensors were covered, the map had no
obtains perceptual information through an intermediate state in the
information and the controller received random noise as input. In
formofanelevationmap, ratherthandirectlyingestingrawsensordata.
this condition, the robot made contact with the riser of the first stair,
This has the advantage that the model is independent of the specific
which could not be perceived in advance, revised its estimate of the
exteroceptive sensors. (We use LiDAR and stereo cameras in different
terrain profile, adjusted its gait accordingly, and successfully climbed
deployments, withnoretrainingorfine-tuning.) However, theelevation
the stairs. On the way down, the blinded robot made a hard landing
map representation omits detail that may be present in the raw sensory
with its front feet but kept its balance and stepped down softly with its
input and may provide additional information concerning material and
hind legs.
texture. Furthermore, our elevation map construction relies on a classi-
Lastly, we tested locomotion over an elevated slippery surface (Fig- cal pose estimation module that is not trained jointly with the rest of
ure 5E). After the robot stepped onto the slippery platform, it detected the system. Appropriately folding the processing of raw sensory input
the low friction and adapted its behavior to step faster and keep its into the network may further enhance the speed and robustness of the
balance. The momentarily sliding feet violated the assumption of the controller. In addition, an occlusion model could be learned, such that
kinematic pose estimator, which in turn destabilized the estimated ele- the policy understands that there’s an occlusion behind the cliff and
vation map and rendered exteroception uninformative during this time. avoids stepping off it. Another limitation is the inability to complete
The controller seamlessly fell back on proprioception until the esti- locomotion tasks which would require maneuvers very different from
mated elevation map stabilized and exteroception became informative normal walking, for example recovering from a leg stuck in narrow
again. holes or climbing onto high ledges.
3. DISCUSSION
4. MATERIALS AND METHODS
We have presented a fast and robust quadrupedal locomotion controller
Overview
for challenging terrain. The controller seamlessly integrates extero-
ceptive and proprioceptive input. Exteroceptive perception enables We train a neural network policy in simulation and then perform zero-
the robot to traverse the environment quickly and gracefully by antic- shot sim-to-real transfer. Our method consists of three stages, illus-
ipating the terrain and adapting its gait accordingly before contact is trated in Figure 6.
made. When exteroceptive perception is misleading, incomplete, or First, a teacher policy is trained with RL to follow a random target
missingaltogether,thecontrollersmoothlytransitionstoproprioceptive velocity over randomly generated terrain with random disturbances.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 9
A soft obstacle B transparent obstacle
C sensor uncovered D sensor covered
E slippery step
a b c d e
c
b
a d e
Fig. 4. Internal belief state inspection during perceptive failure using a learned belief decoder. Red dots indicate height samples given as input
to the policy. Blue dots show the controller’s internal estimate of the terrain profile. (A) After stepping on a soft obstacle that cannot support a
foothold, the policy correctly revises its estimate of the terrain profile downwards. (B) A transparent obstacle is correctly incorporated into the
terrain profile after contact is made. (C) With operational sensors, the robot swiftly and gracefully climbs the stairs, with no spurious contacts.
(D) When the robot is blinded by covering the sensors, the policy can no longer anticipate the terrain but remains robust and successfully tra-
verses the stairs. (E) When stepping onto a slippery platform, the policy identifies low friction and compensates for the induced pose estimation
drift. The graph shows a decoded friction coefficient.

===== PAGE 10 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 10
1. Teacher policy training
Environment Teacher Policy Action
Command
Proprioception
Height scan
joint difference
phase difference
Privileged info
2. Student policy training
Student Policy
Drift for each foot C Co o m m m m an a d nd student Proprioception Belief action
encoder
Noisy height scan
Outliers
Drift for each area
True height scan Teacher teacher
Privileged info Policy action
3. Deployment
2x Dome Lidar
50Hz
Elevation mapping 20Hz
Sampled height scan
ssol
roivaheb
MLP
exteroceptive
encoder
exteroceptive
latent
privileged
encoder
privileged
latent
Train with PPO
Reward
MLP
hidden
Belief
decoder
reconstruction loss
controller
4x realsense
Action
Locomotion control
Command
Proprioception MLP
point cloud Belief
encoder
hidden
Student Policy
Fig. 5. Overview of the training methods and deployment. We first train a teacher policy with access to privileged simulation data using re-
inforcement learning (RL). This teacher policy is then distilled into a student policy, which is trained to imitate the teacher’s actions and to
reconstruct the ground-truth environment state from noisy observations. We deploy the student policy zero-shot on real hardware using height
samples from a robot-centric elevation map.

===== PAGE 11 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 11
The policy has access to privileged information such as noiseless ter- In addition to terrains composed of a variety of slopes and steps,
rain measurements, ground friction, and the disturbances that were we modelled four different types of stairs in the training environment;
introduced. standard, open, ledged, and random. We use boxes to form the stairs,
In the second stage, a student policy is trained to reproduce the because stair risers modeled by a height map are not perfectly verti-
teacher policy’s actions without using this privileged information. The cal; we observed that the policy exploited these non-vertical edges in
student policy constructs a belief state to capture unobserved informa- simulation, resulting in poor sim-to-real transfer.
tionusingarecurrentencoderandoutputsanactionbasedonthisbelief
state. During training, we leverage two losses: a behavior cloning loss Domain randomization
and a reconstruction loss. The behavior cloning loss aims to imitate We randomize the masses of the robot’s body and legs, the initial joint
the teacher policy. The reconstruction loss encourages the encoder to position and velocity, and the initial body orientation and velocity
produce an informative internal representation. in each episode. In addition, external force and torque are applied
Lastly, we transfer the learned student policy to the physical robot to the body of the robot and the friction coefficients of the feet are
and deploy it in the real world with onboard sensors. The robot con- occasionally set to a low value to introduce slippage.
structsanelevationmapbyintegratingdepthdatafromonboardsensors,
and samples height readings from the constructed elevation map to Termination
form the exteroceptive input to the policy. This exteroceptive input is
We terminate a training episode and start a new one when the robot
combined with proprioceptive sensory data and is given to the neural
reaches an undesirable state. Termination criteria are: body collision
network, which produces actuator commands.
with the ground, large body tilt, and exceeding the joint torque limit
of the actuators. These criteria help shape the motion and obtain
Problem formulation
constraint-satisfying behaviors.
We formulate our control problem in discrete time dynamics, where the
environment is fully defined by the state st at time step t. The policy
Teacher policy training
performsanaction at andobservestheenvironmentviaot whichcomes
from an observation model O(ot |st,at ). Then, the environment moves In the first stage of training we aim to find an optimal reference control
to the next state s t+1 with transition probability P(s t+1 |st,at ) and policy which has access to perfect, privileged information and enables
ANYmal to follow a desired command velocity over randomly gener-
returns a reward r t+1 .
ered W a h M en a a rk ll o s v ta D te e s c a is re io o n b P se r r o v c a e b s l s e ( s M uc D h P t ) h . a W t o h t e = n t s h t e , r t e hi i s s c u a n n o b b e se c r o v n a s b i l d e - a v t d e e d s t ∈ er R ra 3 in = . T ( h v e x d , e v s y i , r w ed ), c w om he m re an v d x, i v s y ge re n p e r r e a s t e e n d ts ra t n h d e o lo m n l g y it a u s d a in v a e l c a t n o d r
information, however, such as external forces or full terrain informa- lateral velocity and w represents the yaw velocity, all in the robot’s
body frame.
tion in our case, the dynamics are modeled as a Partially Observable
Markov Decision Process (POMDP). We used Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [59] to train the
The RL objective is to find a policy π∗ that maximizes the expected teacher policy. The teacher is modeled as a Gaussian policy, at ∼
discounted reward over the future trajectory, such that N(π θ (ot = st ),σI), where π θ is implemented by a multilayer per-
ceptron (MLP) parameterized by θ, and σ represents the variance for
∞
π ∗ = argmaxE[ ∑ γtrt ]. each action.
a t=0
Observation and Action
A number of RL algorithms have been developed to solve fully- The teacher observation is defined as oteacher = (o p ,oe,s p), where
t t t t
observable MDPs and are readily available to be used for training. o p refers to the proprioceptive observation, oe the exteroceptive ob-
However, the case of POMDPs is more challenging since the state is t p p t
servation, and s the privileged state. o contains the body velocity,
not fully observable. This is often overcome by constructing a belief t t
orientation, joint position and velocity history, action history, and each
state bt from a history of observations {o
0
,··· ,ot } in an attempt to
leg’s phase. oe is a vector of height samples around each foot with five
capture the full state. In deep reinforcement learning, this is frequently t
p
different radii. The privileged state s includes contact states, contact
done by stacking a sequence of previous observations [54] or by using t
forces, contact normals, friction coefficient, thigh and shank contact
architectures which can compress past information such as Recurrent
states, external forces and torques applied to the body, and swing phase
Neural Networks (RNNs) [55, 56] or Temporal Convolutional Net-
duration.
works (TCNs) [4, 57].
Ouractionspaceisinspiredbycentralpatterngenerators(CPGs)[4].
Training a complex neural network policy that handles sequential
data naively from scratch can be time-consuming [4]. Therefore we Each leg l = {1,2,3,4} keeps a phase variable φ l and defines a
nominal trajectory based on the phase. The nominal trajectory is a
use privileged learning [45], in which we first train a teacher policy
stepping motion of the foot tip and we calculate the nominal joint
with privileged information, and then distill the teacher policy into a
student policy via supervised learning. target q i (φ l ) for each joint actuator i = {1,··· ,12} using inverse
kinematics. The action from the policy is the phase difference ∆φ and
l
Training environment the residual joint position target ∆q i . More details of the observation
and action space are in supplementary section S5.
We use RaiSim [58] as our simulator to build the training environment.
There, we simulate multiple ANYmal-C robots on randomly generated
Policy architecture
rough terrain in parallel with an integrated actuator model [3] to close
the reality gap. We model the teacher policy π θ as an MLP. It consists of three MLP
components: exteroceptive encoder, privileged encoder, and the main
Terrain network, as shown in Figure 6. The exteroceptive encoder ge receives
We define parameterized terrain as shown in Figure 6.1. The terrain is oe and outputs a smaller latent representation le:
t t
modeled as a height map; further details are provided in supplementary
section S4. l
t
e = ge (o
t
e)

===== PAGE 12 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 12
p
The privileged encoder gp receives the privileged state s
t
and outputs directlymeasure. Therefore, thepolicyneedstoconsiderthesequential
priv correlation to estimate the unobservable states. We propose to use a
a latent representation l :
t recurrent belief state encoder to combine sequences of both exterocep-
l
t
priv = gp (s
t
p) tion and proprioception to estimate the unobservable states as a belief
state.
These encoders compress each input to a more compact representations The student policy consists of a recurrent belief state encoder and
and facilitate reuse of some of the teacher policy components by the an MLP, as shown in Figure 6.2. We denote the hidden state of the
student policy. More details on each layer are in supplementary section recurrent network by ht . The belief state encoder takes o
t
student and ht
S6 as input and outputs a latent vector bt , which we refer to as the belief
state. The goal is to match the belief state bt with the feature vector
Rewards
(le,l priv) of the teacher policy which encodes all locomotion-relevant
We define a positive reward for following the command velocity and a t t
p
negativerewardforviolatingsomeimposedconstraints. Thecommand-
information. We then pass o
t
and bt to the MLP which computes the
output action.
following reward is defined as follows:
The MLP structure remains the same as for the teacher policy, such
(cid:40)
1.0, if v ·v > |v | that we can reuse the learned weights of the teacher policy to initialize
r command = exp(−(v ·v−|v |)2), othe d r e w s ise des the student network and speed up training.
des des
Training is performed in supervised fashion by minimizing two
(1)
where v ∈ R2 is the desired horizontal velocity and v ∈ R2 is the losses: a behavior cloning loss and a reconstruction loss. The behavior
des cloning loss is defined as the squared distance between the student
current horizontal body velocity with respect to the body frame. The
action and the teacher action given the same state and command. The
same reward is applied to the yaw command as well. We penalize
reconstruction loss is the squared distance between the noiseless height
the velocity component orthogonal to the desired velocity as well as
sample and privileged information (oe,s p) and their reconstruction
the body velocity around roll, pitch, and yaw. Additionally, we use t t
from the belief state. We generate samples by rolling out the student
shaping rewards for body orientation, joint torque, joint velocity, joint
policy to increase robustness [60, 61].
acceleration, foot slippage as well as shank and knee collision.
Body orientation reward was used to avoid strange posture of the
Height sample randomization
body. Joint related reward terms were used to avoid overly aggressive
Duringstudenttraining, weinjectrandomnoiseintotheheightsamples
motion. Foot slippage and collision reward terms were used to avoid
using a parameterized noise model n(o˜e|oe,z), z ∈ R8×4. We apply
them. We tuned the reward terms by looking at the policy’s behavior t t
two different types of measurement noise when sampling the heights,
in simulation. In addition to the traversal performance, we checked
as shown in Figure 7A:
the smoothness of the locomotion. All reward terms are specified in
supplementary section S7. 1. Shifting scan points laterally.
Curriculum
2. Perturbing the height values.
We use two curricula to ramp up difficulty as the policy’s performance
improves. One curriculum adjusts terrain difficulty using an adaptive EachnoisevalueissampledfromaGaussiandistribution, andthenoise
method [4] and the other changes elements such as reward or applied parameter z defines the variance. Both types of noise are applied in
disturbances using a logistic function [3]. three different scopes, all with their own noise variance: per scan point,
For the terrain curriculum, a particle filter updates the terrain pa- per foot, and per episode. The noise values per scan point and per
rameters such that they remain challenging but achievable at any point foot are resampled at every time step while the episodic noise remains
during policy training [4]. constant for all scan points.
The second curriculum multiplies the magnitude of domain ran- Additionally, we define three mapping conditions with associated
domization and some reward terms (joint velocity, joint acceleration, noise parameters z to simulate changing map quality and error sources,
orientation, slip, thigh and shank contact) by a factor that is monotoni- as shown in Figure 7B.
cally increasing and asymptotically trending to 1:
1. Nominal noise assuming good map quality during regular opera-
c k+1 = (c k )d, tion.
where c is the curriculum factor at the kth iteration and 0 < d < 1 is
k 2. Large offsets through high per-foot noise to simulate map offsets
the convergence rate.
due to pose estimation drift or deformable terrain.
Student policy training
3. Large noise magnitude for each scan point to simulate complete
After we train a teacher policy that can traverse various terrain with lack of terrain information due to occlusion or mapping failure.
the help of privileged information, we distill it into a student pol-
icy that only has access to information that is available on the real These three mapping conditions are selected at the beginning of each
robot. We use the same training environment as for the teacher pol- training episode in a ratio of 60%, 30%, and 10%.
icy, but add additional noise to the student height sample observation: Finally, we divide each training terrain into cells and add an ad-
ostudent = (o p ,n(oe)), where n(oe) is a noise model applied to the ditional offset to the height sample, depending on which cell it was
t t t t
height sample input. The noise model simulates different failure cases sampled from. This simulates transitions between areas with different
of exteroception frequently encountered during field deployment and terrain characteristics, such as vegetation and deep snow. The param-
is detailed below. eter vector z is also part of a learning curriculum and its magnitude
When there is a large noise in the exteroception, it becomes unob- increases linearly with training duration.
servable, thus the dynamics is considered to be POMDP. In addition, The height sample representation is specified in more detail in
the privileged states are not observable due to the lack of sensors to supplementary section S8.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 13
A Height scan noise model B Different noise levels
Select with probability
Zero noise Nominal noise
Large offset Large noise
Per point noise (sampled every timestep)
Per point outlier (only applied to some points)
Per foot noise (sampled every timestep)
Per foot noise (fixed through episode)
C D
Belief encoder
Belief decoder
proprioceptive c + belief state privileged decoder
RNN estimated
hidden
privileged info
exteroceptive decoder
exteroceptive
estimated
gate exteroceptive +
exteroceptive info
gate
attention
next attention
hidden
hidden
Fig. 6. Details of robust terrain perception components. (A) During student training, random noise is added to the height samples. The noise is
sampled from a Gaussian distribution N(0,zl ∈ R8), where each zl controls a different noise component i per leg l. (B) We use multiple noise
i
configurations z to simulate different operating conditions. “Zero noise" is applied during teacher training, while “nominal noise" represents
normal mapping conditions during student training. “Large offset" noise simulates large map offsets due to pose estimation drift or deformable
terrain surfaces. “Large noise" simulates a complete lack of terrain information due to occlusion or sensor failure. (C) The student policy belief
encoder incorporates a recurrent core and an attentional gate that integrates the proprioceptive and exteroceptive modalities. The gate explicitly
controls which aspects of exteroceptive data to pass through. (D) The belief decoder has a gate for reconstructing the exteroceptive data. It is
only used during training and for introspection into the belief state.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 14
Belief state encoder to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper or the
The recurrent belief state encoder encodes states that are not directly Supplementary Materials.
observable. To integrate proprioceptive and exteroceptive data, we
introduce a gated encoder as shown in Figure 7C, inspired by gated
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
RNN models [62, 63] and multimodal information fusion [64–66].
Theencoderlearnsanadaptivegatingfactorthatcontrolshowmuch Section S1. Nomenclature
exteroceptive information to pass through. First, proprioception o p , Section S2. Evaluating the importance of exteroception:
t
exteroceptivefeaturesfromnoisyobservationsl
t
e = ge (o˜
t
e),andhidden simulation result
state st are encoded by the RNN module into the intermediate belief Section S3. Training details
state b(cid:48). Then, the attention vector α is computed from b(cid:48). It controls Section S4. Terrain generation
t t
how much exteroceptive information enters the final belief state bt : Section S5. Observation and action
Section S6. Network architecture
b t (cid:48) ,h t+1 = RNN(o t p ,l t e,ht ) Section S7. Reward function
α = σ(ga (b
t
(cid:48))) Section S8. Height sample noise
bt = g
b
(b
t
(cid:48))+l
t
e (cid:12)α S
F
e
ig
c
u
ti
r
o
e
n
S
S
1
9
.
. B
C
e
o
l
m
ie
p
f
a
e
r
n
is
c
o
o
n
de
o
r
f
e
th
v
e
al
p
u
r
a
e
ti
s
o
e
n
nted controller to a
Here, ga and g
b
are fully-connected neural networks and σ(·) is the proprioceptive baseline over random terrains
sigmoid function. Figure S2. Ablation analysis of the presented belief encoder
The same gate is used in the decoder, where it is used to reconstruct Table S1. Hyperparameters for PPO
the privileged information and the height samples (Figure 7D). This is Table S2. Hyperparameters for student training
used to calculate a reconstruction loss that encourages the belief state Table S3. Observations
to capture veridical information about the environment. Table S4. Action difference between teacher and student under
We use the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [62] as our RNN architec- two exteroceptive noise conditions.
ture. The evaluation of the effectiveness of gate structure is presented Movie S1. Walking over stairs in different directions.
in supplementary section S9. Movie S2. Baseline comparison.
Movie S3. Robustness evaluation.
Deployment Movie S4. Slippery surface and soft obstacle.
We deployed our controller on the ANYmal C robot with two different
sensor configurations, either using two Robosense Bpearl [67] dome REFERENCES
Lidar sensors or four Intel RealSense D435 depth cameras [68]. We
trained our policy in PyTorch [69] and deployed on the robot zero-shot 1. M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, R. Playter, Bigdog, the rough-
terrain quadruped robot, IFAC Proceedings Volumes 10822–10825
without any fine-tuning. We build a robot-centric 2.5D elevation map
(2008).
at 20 Hz by estimating the robot’s pose and registering the point-cloud
2. B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, S. Kim, Mini cheetah: A platform for pushing the
readings from the sensors accordingly. The policy runs at 50 Hz and
limits of dynamic quadruped control, 2019 International Conference on
samples the heights from the latest elevation map, filling a randomly
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA), 6295–6301 (IEEE, 2019).
sampled value if no map information is available at a query location.
3. J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, V. Koltun,
We developed an elevation mapping pipeline for fast terrain map- M. Hutter, Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots,
ping on a graphics processing unit (GPU) to parallelize point-cloud ScienceRobotics 4 (2019).
processing. We follow a similar approach to Fankhauser et al. [17] to 4. J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, M. Hutter, Learning
update the map in a Kalman-filter fashion and additionally perform quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain, Science Robotics 5
drift compensation and ray casting to obtain a more consistent map. (2020).
This fast mapping implementation was crucial to maintain fast process- 5. H.-W. Park, P. M. Wensing, S. Kim, Jumping over obstacles with MIT
Cheetah 2, RoboticsandAutonomousSystems p. 103703 (2021).
ing rates and keep up with the fast locomotion speeds achieved by our
6. Boston Dynamics, Spot, https://www.bostondynamics.com/spot (2021).
controller.
[Online; accessed March-2021].
7. C.Gehring,P.Fankhauser,L.Isler,R.Diethelm,S.Bachmann,M.Potz,
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS L. Gerstenberg, M. Hutter, ANYmal in the field: Solving industrial
inspection of an offshore HVDC platform with a quadrupedal robot,
Funding The project was funded, in part, by the Intel Network on
FieldandServiceRobotics, 247–260 (Springer, 2021).
Intelligent Systems, the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF)
8. Agility Robotics, Robots, https://www.agilityrobotics.com/robots (2021).
through the National Centre of Competence in Research Robotics and
[Online; accessed June-2021].
project No. 188596, the European Research Council (ERC) under the 9. Unitree Robotics, A1, https://www.unitree.com/products/a1/ (2021).
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme [Online; accessed March-2021].
grant agreement No. 852044, No. 780883 and No. 101016970. The 10. Ghost Robotics, Vision 60, https://www.ghostrobotics.io/ (2021). [On-
work has been conducted as part of ANYmal Research, a community line; accessed June-2021].
to advance legged robotics. Author contributions T.M. formulated 11. J. S. Matthis, J. L. Yates, M. M. Hayhoe, Gaze and the control of foot
the main idea of combining inputs from multiple modalities. J.L. and placement when walking in natural terrain, Current Biology 1224–1233
(2018).
J.H designed and tested the initial setup. T.M. developed software and
12. ANYbotics, ANYmal, https://www.anybotics.com/
trained the controller. T.M. and L.W. set up the perception pipeline on
anymal-autonomous-legged-robot/ (2021). [Online; accessed
the robot. T.M. conducted most of the indoor experiments. T.M., J.L.,
June-2021].
and L.W. conducted outdoor experiments. All authors refined ideas,
13. P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, D. Rodriguez, R. Kaestner, M. Hutter,
contributed in the experiment design, analyzed the data, and wrote R. Siegwart, Kinect v2 for mobile robot navigation: Evaluation and
the paper. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no modeling, 2015 International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR),
competing interests. Data and materials availability All data needed 388–394 (IEEE, 2015).

===== PAGE 15 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 15
14. C. Ye, J. Borenstein, A new terrain mapping method for mobile robots 35. X. B. Peng, E. Coumans, T. Zhang, T.-W. E. Lee, J. Tan, S. Levine,
obstacle negotiation, Unmanned ground vehicle technology V, 52–62 Learning agile robotic locomotion skills by imitating animals, Robotics:
(International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2003). ScienceandSystems (2020).
15. D. Belter, P. Skrzypczyn´ski, Rough terrain mapping and classification 36. Y. Yang, K. Caluwaerts, A. Iscen, T. Zhang, J. Tan, V. Sindhwani, Data
for foothold selection in a walking robot, 2010IEEESafetySecurityand efficient reinforcement learning for legged robots, ConferenceonRobot
RescueRobotics, 1–6 (2010). Learning, 1–10 (PMLR, 2020).
16. P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, C. Gehring, M. Hutter, R. Siegwart. Robot- 37. Z. Xie, P. Clary, J. Dao, P. Morais, J. Hurst, M. van de Panne, Learning
centric elevation mapping with uncertainty estimates. Mobile Service locomotion skills for cassie: Iterative design and sim-to-real, Proceed-
Robotics (World Scientific, 2014), 433–440. ings of the Conference on Robot Learning, L. P. Kaelbling, D. Kragic,
17. P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, M. Hutter, Probabilistic terrain mapping for K. Sugiura, eds., 317–329 (PMLR, 2020).
mobilerobotswithuncertainlocalization,IEEERoboticsandAutomation 38. J. Siekmann, K. Green, J. Warila, A. Fern, J. Hurst, Blind bipedal stair
Letters 3019–3026 (2018). traversal via sim-to-real reinforcement learning, Robotics: Science and
18. M. Zucker, J. A. Bagnell, C. G. Atkeson, J. Kuffner, An optimization ap- Systems (2021).
proachtoroughterrainlocomotion,2010IEEEInternationalConference 39. A. Kumar, Z. Fu, D. Pathak, J. Malik, Rma: Rapid motor adaptation
onRoboticsandAutomation, 3589–3595 (IEEE, 2010). for legged robots, ProceedingsofRobotics: ScienceandSystems(RSS)
19. P. D. Neuhaus, J. E. Pratt, M. J. Johnson, Comprehensive summary of (2021).
the institute for human and machine cognition’s experience with Little- 40. C.Yang,K.Yuan,Q.Zhu,W.Yu,Z.Li,Multi-expertlearningofadaptive
Dog, TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch 216–235 (2011). legged locomotion, ScienceRobotics p. eabb2174 (2020).
20. J. Z. Kolter, Y. Kim, A. Y. Ng, Stereo vision and terrain modeling for 41. J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, M. Hutter, Robust recovery controller for a
quadruped robots, 2009IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsand quadrupedal robot using deep reinforcement learning, arXivpreprint
Automation, 1557–1564 (IEEE, 2009). arXiv:1901.07517 (2019).
21. I. Havoutis, J. Ortiz, S. Bazeille, V. Barasuol, C. Semini, D. G. Caldwell, 42. S. Gangapurwala, M. Geisert, R. Orsolino, M. Fallon, I. Havoutis,
Onboard perception-based trotting and crawling with the hydraulic RLOC: Terrain-aware legged locomotion using reinforcement learning
quadruped robot (HyQ), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on and optimal control, arXivpreprintarXiv:2012.03094 (2020).
IntelligentRobotsandSystems, 6052–6057 (IEEE, 2013). 43. M. Focchi, R. Orsolino, M. Camurri, V. Barasuol, C. Mastalli, D. G.
22. C. Mastalli, M. Focchi, I. Havoutis, A. Radulescu, S. Calinon, J. Buchli, Caldwell, C. Semini. Heuristic planning for rough terrain locomotion
D. G. Caldwell, C. Semini, Trajectory and foothold optimization using in presence of external disturbances and variable perception quality.
low-dimensional models for rough terrain locomotion, 2017 IEEE Inter- Advances in Robotics Research: From Lab to Market (Springer, 2020),
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 1096–1103 165–209.
(IEEE, 2017). 44. Boston Dynamics, Spot user guide release 2.0 version A,
23. D. Belter, P. Łabe˛cki, P. Skrzypczyn´ski, Adaptive motion planning for https://www.generationrobots.com/media/spot-boston-dynamics/
autonomous rough terrain traversal with a walking robot, Journal of spot-user-guide-r2.0-va.pdf (2021). [Online; accessed June-2021].
FieldRobotics 337–370 (2016). 45. D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, P. Krähenbühl, Learning by cheating,
24. P. Fankhauser, M. Bjelonic, C. D. Bellicoso, T. Miki, M. Hutter, Robust ConferenceonRobotLearning, 66–75 (PMLR, 2020).
rough-terrain locomotion with a quadrupedal robot, 2018 IEEE Inter- 46. Komoot, Etzel kulm loop hike, https://bit.ly/35bjfyE (2021). [Online;
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 5761–5768 accessed June-2021].
(IEEE, 2018). 47. M. Bloesch, M. Hutter, M. A. Hoepflinger, S. Leutenegger, C. Gehring,
25. F. Jenelten, T. Miki, A. E. Vijayan, M. Bjelonic, M. Hutter, Perceptive C. D. Remy, R. Siegwart, State estimation for legged robots-consistent
locomotionin roughterrain–onlinefoothold optimization, IEEERobotics fusion of leg kinematics and imu, Robotics 17–24 (2013).
andAutomationLetters 5370–5376 (2020). 48. Komoot, Komoot help guides, https://d21buns5ku92am.cloudfront.net/
26. D.Kim,D.Carballo,J.DiCarlo,B.Katz,G.Bledt,B.Lim,S.Kim,Vision 67683/documents/40488-Komoot%20Guides%20English-4d1241.
aided dynamic exploration of unstructured terrain with a small-scale pdf (2021). [Online; accessed December-2021].
quadruped robot, 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 49. R. C. Coulter, Implementation of the pure pursuit path tracking algo-
Automation(ICRA), 2464–2470 (IEEE, 2020). rithm, Tech.rep., Carnegie-Mellon UNIV Pittsburgh PA Robotics INST
27. O. A. Villarreal-Magaña, V. Barasuol, M. Camurri, M. Focchi, (1992).
L. Franceschi, M. Pontil, D. G. Caldwell, C. Semini, Fast and con- 50. M. Tranzatto, F. Mascarich, L. Bernreiter, C. Godinho, M. Camurri,
tinuousfootholdadaptationfordynamiclocomotionthroughcnns,IEEE S. M. K. Khattak, T. Dang, V. Reijgwart, J. Loeje, D. Wisth, others,
RoboticsandAutomationLetters 2140–2147 (2019). Cerberus: Autonomous legged and aerial robotic exploration in the
28. Boston Dynamics, Atlas | partners in parkour, https://youtu.be/ tunnel and urban circuits of the darpa subterranean challenge, Journal
tF4DML7FIWk (2021). [Online; accessed September-2021]. ofFieldRobotics (2021).
29. X. B. Peng, G. Berseth, M. Van de Panne, Terrain-adaptive locomotion 51. Cerberus, Team cerberus, https://www.subt-cerberus.org/ (2021). [On-
skillsusingdeepreinforcementlearning,ACMTransactionsonGraphics line; accessed June-2021].
(TOG) 1–12 (2016). 52. DARPA, Darpa subterranean challenge competition results finals,
30. X. B. Peng, G. Berseth, K. Yin, M. Van De Panne, Deeploco: Dynamic https://www.subtchallenge.com/results.html (2021). [Online; accessed
locomotion skills using hierarchical deep reinforcement learning, ACM November-2021].
TransactionsonGraphics(TOG) 1–13 (2017). 53. DARPA, Darpa subterranean challenge competition rules final event,
31. X. B. Peng, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, M. van de Panne, Deepmimic: https://www.subtchallenge.com (2021). [Online; accessed June-2021].
Example-guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based charac- 54. V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wier-
ter skills, ACMTrans.Graph. 143:1–143:14 (2018). stra, M. Riedmiller, Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,
32. Z. Xie, H. Y. Ling, N. H. Kim, M. van de Panne, Allsteps: Curriculum- AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,DeepLearningWork-
driven learning of stepping stone skills, Computer Graphics Forum, shop (2013).
213–224 (Wiley Online Library, 2020). 55. P. Zhu, X. Li, P. Poupart, G. Miao, On improving deep reinforcement
33. V.Tsounis,M.Alge,J.Lee,F.Farshidian,M.Hutter,Deepgait: Planning learning for pomdps, arXivpreprintarXiv:1704.07978 (2017).
and control of quadrupedal gaits using deep reinforcement learning, 56. O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, W. M. Czarnecki, M. Mathieu, A. Dudzik,
IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters 3699–3706 (2020). J. Chung, D. H. Choi, R. Powell, T. Ewalds, P. Georgiev, others, Grand-
34. J. Tan, T. Zhang, E. Coumans, A. Iscen, Y. Bai, D. Hafner, S. Bohez, master level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning,
V. Vanhoucke, Sim-to-real: Learning agile locomotion for quadruped Nature 350–354 (2019).
robots, Robotics: ScienceandSystems (2018). 57. S.Bai,J.Z.Kolter,V.Koltun,Anempiricalevaluationofgenericconvolu-

===== PAGE 16 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 16
tionalandrecurrentnetworksforsequencemodeling,arXiv:1803.01271
(2018).
58. J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, M. Hutter, Per-contact iteration method for solv-
ing contact dynamics, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 895–902
(2018).
59. J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, O. Klimov, Proximal
policy optimization algorithms, arXivpreprintarXiv:1707.06347 (2017).
60. S. Ross, G. Gordon, D. Bagnell, A reduction of imitation learning and
structured prediction to no-regret online learning, Proceedings of the
fourteenthinternationalconferenceonartificialintelligenceandstatistics,
627–635 (JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011).
61. W. M. Czarnecki, R. Pascanu, S. Osindero, S. Jayakumar, G. Swirszcz,
M.Jaderberg,Distillingpolicydistillation,ProceedingsofMachineLearn-
ing Research, K. Chaudhuri, M. Sugiyama, eds., 1331–1340 (PMLR,
2019).
62. K. Cho, B. Van Merriënboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares,
H. Schwenk, Y. Bengio, Learning phrase representations using rnn
encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation, ConferenceonEm-
piricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP),p.1724–1734
(2014).
63. S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, NeuralCom-
putation 1735–1780 (1997).
64. T. Anzai, K. Takahashi, Deep gated multi-modal learning: In-hand
object pose changes estimation using tactile and image data, 2020
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 9361–9368 (IEEE, 2020).
65. J. Kim, J. Koh, Y. Kim, J. Choi, Y. Hwang, J. W. Choi, Robust deep
multi-modal learning based on gated information fusion network, Asian
ConferenceonComputerVision, 90–106 (Springer, 2018).
66. J. Arevalo, T. Solorio, M. Montes-y Gómez, F. A. González, Gated
multimodal units for information fusion, ICLRworkshop (2017).
67. Rs-bpearl (2021, april), https://www.robosense.ai/en/rslidar/RS-Bpearl.
68. Intel realsense (2021, april), https://www.intelrealsense.com/.
69. A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf,
E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
L. Fang, J. Bai, S. Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 32, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F.d'Alché-Buc,E.Fox,R.Garnett,eds.(CurranAssociates,Inc.,2019),
8024–8035.
70. M. Takahiro, L. Joonho, M. Yuntao, E. Pascal, Rslgym, GitHubreposi-
tory (2021).
71. D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, ICLR
(2015).
72. A. Lagae, S. Lefebvre, R. Cook, T. DeRose, G. Drettakis, D. S. Ebert,
J.P.Lewis,K.Perlin,M.Zwicker,Asurveyofproceduralnoisefunctions,
ComputerGraphicsForum, 2579–2600 (Wiley Online Library, 2010).
73. A. L. Maas, A. Y. Hannun, A. Y. Ng, Rectifier nonlinearities improve
neural network acoustic models, Proc.icml, p. 3 (Citeseer, 2013).

===== PAGE 17 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 17
S1. Nomenclature
Table S1. Hyperparameters for PPO.
s state
o observation learning rate 5.0 E-4
b belief state
learning rate decay gamma 0.9999
h hidden state
l latent feature discount factor 0.996
v linear velocity
learning epoch 2
ω angular velocity
τ joint torque GAE-lambda 0.95
q joint position
clip ratio 0.2
φ CPG phase
∆φ CPG phase base frequency entropy coefficient 0.005
0
c curriculum factor
k batch size 8300
c student curriculum factor
sk
L behavior cloning loss
bc
L reconstruction loss
re
(·)p proprioceptive quantity Table S2. Hyperparameters for student training.
(·)e exteroceptive quantity learning rate 5.0 E-4
(·)priv privileged quantity
(·)target target quantity truncate step for TBPTT 10
(·) t quantity at time t learning epoch 2
(˜·) noisy quantity
(·˙) first derivative
(¨·) second derivative Through Time (TBPTT). The ratio between behavior cloning loss and
g(·) Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) encoder reconstruction loss is 0.5. Therefore the loss is set to L
bc
+0.5·L
re
.
N() Normal distribution Hyperparameters for student training are given in Table S2.
(cid:12) Hadamard product
p(·) foot trajectory function
S4. Terrain generation
IK(·) inverse kinematics function
The terrain types are rough, rough discrete, large steps, boxes, grid
steps, step stairs, and stairs, as shown in Figure 6.1. There are four
types of stairs: standard stair, open stair, ledged stair, and random
S2. Evaluating the importance of exteroception: Additional
stair. Each terrain type is parameterized by different terrain properties,
experiments in simulation
which are randomized during training.
We compare the success rate over various stepped terrain and stairs in The rough terrain is parameterized by Perlin noise [72] and the
simulation to further evaluate the performance quantitatively. rough discrete and large steps are created by quantizing it. While
The robot was given a fixed forward velocity command of 0.7 m/s rough discrete terrain does not restrict the number of quantization
for a duration of 10 seconds. We collected 300 trials to calculate levels, large steps only allow for two height levels (h ∈ [0,0.4] m).
the success rate, where we consider a trial a success if the robot can For grid steps, the parameters are mean step height (h ∈ [0.05,0.4] m)
traverse 4 m without failure. As shown in Figure 8A, 8B our controller and step width (d ∈ [0.2,0.7] m). Some examples of different grid
significantly outperformed the baseline and can traverse a much wider steps are shown in Figure 8A. Note that the parameter range shown in
range of terrain. thefigureisonlyforevaluationanddifferentfromtherangeusedduring
training. Parameters for stairs contain step depth (d ∈ [0.25,1.0] m)
S3. Training details and height (h ∈ [0.01,0.22] m). The height and depth values for
Thecontrolfrequencyofthepolicywassetto50Hz, and250trajectory random stair were set at each according to a ratio (cid:101) ∼ N(1.0,0.2),
time steps per environment are collected for one training iteration. We such that xˆ = x · (cid:101), where x is the given depth or height parameter.
parallelized the simulation environment to perform rollouts with 1000 Examples of different stairs are shown in Figure 8B. The boxes terrain
environments simultaneously. We used our custom implementation of consists of multiple boxes with maximum height 0.25 m lying in a
PPO [59] to train the teacher policy [70]. Observations are normalized random position with random yaw angles.
using running mean and standard deviation before giving them to the
policy network. The curriculum factors were updated exponentially S5. Observation and action
every training episode c k+1 = cd k , with convergence rate d = 0.98. We The observation vectors are defined in Table S3. Proprioceptive input
use the Adam [71] optimizer with exponential learning rate decay. The includes command, joint, and body information, as well as leg phase
hyperparameters for PPO are given in Table S1. information. The central pattern generator (CPG)’s phase information
For student training, we performed rollouts with 300 environments consists of ∆φ , cosφ , sinφ , and base frequency for each leg l. For
l l l
and collected 400 timesteps of trajectory for one training iteration. We exteroception, we use height samples around each foot instead of the
start the student training without height sample noise and gradually local elevation map. The circular sampling pattern comprises {6, 8,
increase the noise level through a student curriculum factor which 10, 12, 16} points around each foot, with radii {0.08, 0.16, 0.26, 0.36,
linearly increases over training epochs. We use flat terrain for the 0.48} m, respectively.
first 10 epochs, and then enable the adaptive curriculum for the terrain The action is defined as (cid:104)∆φ ,∆q (cid:105), where ∆φ and ∆q refer to the
l i l i
generation. After 20 epochs, we increase the student curriculum factor phase offset per leg (l ∈ {legs}) and the residual joint position target
c linearly until we reach 100 epochs. Then, we keep c = 1.0. We (i ∈ {1,··· ,12}), respectively. We have a nominal foot trajectory
sk sk
train the RNN unit of the encoder with Truncated Backpropagation p(φ) : R −→ R3 that maps each φ to a target foot position, which
l

===== PAGE 18 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 18
are concatenated with proprioceptive observations and fed into another
Table S3. Observations. Proprioception is used for both teacher MLP with three hidden layers {256, 160, 128}. The activation function
and student training. Exteroception is given in the form of height for all MLPs is LeakyReLU [73].
samples. The privileged information is used only for teacher training. We use a GRU with an exteroceptive gate for the belief encoder
Observation type Input Dim. (Figure 7C). The GRU consists of 2 stacked layers with 50 hidden
units each. The belief encoder and exteroceptive gate g
b
, ga are used
Proprioception command 3 to calculate 96+24 = 120 dimensional belief state bt and 96 dimen-
body orientation 3
sional attention vector α. Each encoder has two hidden layers with
{64, 64} and {64, 64} hidden units each. The filtered exteroceptive
body velocity 6 information le (cid:12)α is added to g (b(cid:48)), with zero-padding to match the
t b t
dimensionality.
joint position 12
joint velocity 12 S7. Reward function
joint position history (3 time steps) 36 The reward function is defined as r = 0.75(r lv +rav +r lvo ) +r b +
0.003r
fc
+ 0.1rco + 0.001r
j
+ 0.08r
jc
+ 0.003rs + 1.0 · 10−6rτ +
joint velocity history (2 time steps) 24 0.003r . The individual terms are defined as follows.
slip
joint target history (2 time steps) 24
• Linear Velocity Reward (r ): This term encourages the policy
lv
CPG phase information 13 to follow a desired horizontal velocity (velocity in xy plane)
command:
Exteroception height samples 208

Privileged info. contact states 4
 exp(−|v|2), if |v des | = 0
r lv = 1.0, else if v des ·v > |v des |
contact forces 12 exp(−(v ·v−|v |)2), otherwise
des des
contact normals 12
where v ∈ R2 is the desired horizontal velocity and v ∈ R2 is
des
friction coefficients 4 the current body velocity with respect to the body frame.
thigh and shank contact 8 • Angular Velocity Reward (rav ): This term encourages the policy
to follow a desired yaw velocity command:
external forces and torques 6

airtime 4  exp(−ω z 2), if ω des = 0
rav = 1.0, else if ω
des
·ωz > ω
des
exp(−(ω
des
·ωz −ω
des
)2), otherwise
generates periodic stepping motion as φ cycles within [0,2π). From
the action, the joint position target for a leg l is defined as q target = where ω des is the desired yaw velocity and ωz is the current yaw
IK(p(φ
l
+∆φ
l
+∆φ
0
)) +∆q
i∈l
, using analytic inverse kin i e ∈ m l atics velocity with respect to the body frame.
IK(·) and base phase frequency ∆φ . The nominal foot trajectory is
0 • Linear Orthogonal Velocity Reward (r ): This term penalizes
lvo
defined as follows.
the velocity orthogonal to the target direction:
If the phase is in swing-up (0 ≤ φ ≤ π/2),
l
r
lvo
= exp(−3.0|vo |2),
p (φ ) = (cid:104)xn,yn,zn +0.2·(−2t3 +3t2)(cid:105),
l l l
w
l
here
l
t = 2/π ·
l
φ .
l where vo = v−(v
des
·v)v
des
.
l l
• Body motion Reward (r ): This term penalizes the body velocity
{x,y,z}n is the nominal foot position at the default stance configu- b
l in directions not part of the command:
ration. The cubic Hermite spline connects z = zn at φ = 0 and
l l
z = zn l +0.2 at φ l = π/2. r bm = −1.25v2 z −0.4|ωx |−0.4|ωy |.
In the swing-down phase (π/2 < φ ≤ π), the foot height is
l
computed as • Foot Clearance Reward (r fc ): When a leg is in swing phase,
i.e., φ ∈ [0,π), the robot should lift the corresponding foot
i
p l (φ l ) = (cid:104)x l n,yn l ,zn l +0.2·(2t3 l −3t2 l +1)(cid:105), higher than its surroundings. However, to prevent the robot from
where t = 2/π ·φ −1, manifesting unnecessarily high foot clearance, we give a penalty
l l
reward r to regularize the leg trajectory. H is the set of
fcl sample,l
which is symmetric to the previous function. sampled heights around the l-th foot. Then, the clearance cost is
During the stance phase (π < φ l ≤ 2π), p l (φ l ) = (cid:104)x l n,yn l ,zn l (cid:105). defined as
(cid:40)
−1.0, if max(H ) < −0.2
S6. Network architecture r = sample,l
fcl
0.0 otherwise
ThepolicynetworkiscomposedofmultipleMLPs. Theheightsamples
are first encoded into a 24 × 4 = 96 dimensional latent vector, and 4
∑
the privileged information is encoded into a 24 dimensional latent r fc = r fcl
vector using MLP-based encoders (ge , gp ). Each encoder has two l=1
hidden layers with {80, 60} and {64, 32} hidden units respectively. Note that height samples are sampled with respect to the foot
The height samples are first fed into the encoder separately for each height, therefore -0.2 means the terrain is 0.2 m lower than the
foot and then concatenated into one feature vector. Then these features foot; ergo, the foot is 0.2 m higher than the sampled terrain height.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 19
• Shank and Knee Collision Reward (rco ): We want to penalize S8. Height sample noise
undesirable contact between the terrain and robot parts other than During student training, we randomize the height samples drawn
the foot, to avoid hardware damage: aroundeachfoot(Figure7A).Weperturbedthepositionofeachsample
and add noise to the measured height value as follows.
(cid:40)
−c , if shank or knee is in collision
rco =
0.0
k
otherwise
xp = rp cos(θp )+(cid:101)px +(cid:101)
fx
+wx
yp = rp sin(θp )+(cid:101)py +(cid:101)
fy
+wy
where c k is the curriculum factor that increases monotonically hp = h(xp,yp )+(cid:101)pz +(cid:101) fz +wz +(cid:101) outlier
and converges to 1.
where h(xp,yp ) refers to the terrain height at position (xp,yp ). rp
• Joint Motion Reward (r ): This term penalizes joint velocity and
is the radial distance of the point p and θp is the azimuthal angle
acceleration to avoid vib
j
rations:
of p in polar coordinates around the foot. (cid:101)px,(cid:101)py,(cid:101)pz represents
the noise that is sampled for each individual point every time step.
(cid:101) ,(cid:101) ,(cid:101) represents the noise that is sampled for each foot every
12 fx fy fz
rs = −c
k
∑ (0.01q˙
i
2 +q¨
i
2), time step. wx,wy,wz represents the noise that is sampled for each foot
i=1 per episode. (cid:101) outlier is a large noise intermittently added to simulate
outliers.
where q˙ and q¨ are the joint velocity and acceleration, respec- Eachnoiseissampledfromthenormaldistributionusingtheparam-
i i
tively. eter z. (cid:101)px,(cid:101)py ∼ N(0,z
0
), (cid:101)pz ∼ N(0,z
1
), (cid:101)
fx
,(cid:101)
fy
∼ N(0,z
2
),
(cid:101) ∼ N(0,z ), (cid:101) ∼ N(0,z ) with probability p = z ,
fz 3 outlier 4 5
• Joint Constraint Reward (r
jc
): This term introduces a soft con- wx,wy ∼ N(0,z
6
), wz ∼ N(0,z
7
).
straint in the joint space. To avoid the knee joint flipping in the We defined three conditions for the student training; nominal, offset,
opposite direction, we give a penalty for exceeding a threshold: noisy. Each parameter z is defined as follows.
(cid:40) −(q −q )2, if q > q z nominal = (cid:104)0.004,0.005,0.01,0.04,0.03,0.05,0.1(cid:105) (2)
r jc,i = 0.0 i i,th othe i rwise i,th z offset = (cid:104)0.004,0.005,0.01,0.1c sk ,0.1c sk ,0.02,0.1(cid:105) (3)
z = (cid:104)0.004,0.1c ,0.1c ,0.3c ,0.3c ,0.3c ,0.1(cid:105)(4)
noisy sk sk sk sk sk
12
∑
r = r
jc jc,i where c is the student curriculum factor which linearly increases over
i=1 sk
training episodes. We randomly picked one of the conditions at the
beginning and in the middle of a trajectory. The probabilities are 60%,
where q is a threshold value for the ith joint. We only set
i,th 30% and 10%, respectively.
thresholds for the knee joint.
S9. Ablation study of attention gate in belief encoder
• Target Smoothness Reward (rs ): The magnitude of the first and
We evaluated the effect of the exteroceptive gate by comparing the
second order finite difference derivatives of the target foot po-
performance of the belief encoder with and without the gate. For
sitions are penalized such that the generated foot trajectories
this purpose, we trained four student policies using different belief
become smoother:
encoders: "GRU gate", "GRU no gate", "MLP gate" and "MLP no
gate". "GRU gate" uses the proposed exteroceptive gate while "GRU
12
rs = −c
k
∑ ((q
i
d
,
e
t
s −q
i
d
,
e
t−
s
1
)2 +(q
i
d
,
e
t
s −2q
i
d
,
e
t−
s
1
+q
i
d
,
e
t−
s
2
)2), no gate" does not use it. "MLP" uses feed forward network instead of
i=1 the recurrent unit. Figure S2A shows the learning curve of the student
training using four different architectures. The result shows that using
where qdes is the joint target position of joint i at time step t. a recurrent unit improves the performance. MLP failed to reconstruct
i,t the privileged information. Moreover, the exteroceptive gate constantly
improves the performance for both GRU and MLP architectures. Note
• Torque Reward (rτ ): We penalize joint torques to reduce energy
that in the beginning of the training, we started without exteroceptive
consumption (τ ∝ electric current):
noise and terrain curriculum, and increased them gradually. This effect
can be seen as a steep increase of losses and decrease of reward in the
rτ = −c
k
∑ 12 τ
i
2, beg
T
in
o
n
e
in
v
g
a
.
luate the learned model, we collected 300 time steps with
i=1
100 different terrain parameters for each terrain type with two noise
where τ is the ith joint’s torque calculated as output by the actua- conditions: small and large. Each noise parameter z are defined as
i
follows,
tor network.
z = (cid:104)0.004,0.005,0.04,0.04,0.04,0.01,0.1(cid:105) (5)
small
• Slip Reward (r ): We penalize the foot velocity if the foot is in
slip z = (cid:104)0.004,0.3,0.2,0.1,0.1,0.03,0.1(cid:105) (6)
contact with the ground to reduce slippage: large
Then we calculated the squared distance between student action and
r slip = −c k ∑ v2 f,l , teacher action, as well as decoded height samples and ground-truth
l∈{footincontact} height samples. As shown in Table S4, S5, the gated encoder out-
performed the non-gated encoder for both noise cases. The encoder
where v is the velocity of lth foot in contact with the ground. utilizes the exteroceptive input through the skip connection when the
f,l

===== PAGE 20 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 20
exteroception is reliable. When the height samples contain large noise,
the exteroception does not provide reliable information. In this case,
the gated structure and non-gated structure perform similarly (Table
S4, S5). This indicates that the gated structure facilitates the use of
exteroceptive information when it is reliable but does not sacrifice
robustness when it becomes unreliable.
To further evaluate the policies’ performance, a step traversal suc-
cess rate were compared against each policy. The robot was initialized
in front of various height of step and given a constant velocity com-
mand (0.8 m/s) towards the step. We collected 100 trials for each
height of the step and showed the success rate in Figure S2B. The
result shows that "GRU gate" performs the best for both small noise
and large noise case. As seen in the small noise case, the difference
between "GRU gate" and "GRU no gate" is bigger than the large noise
case. This supports that the gated structure can utilize exteroceptive
information more when it is reliable.

===== PAGE 21 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 21
Table S4. Action difference between teacher and student under different noise conditions. The quantities are presented as empirical means with
standard deviations. The belief encoder with the exteroceptive gate exhibits smaller action difference for all types of terrain when the noise is
small. When the exteroception is unreliable (large noise), they perform similarly; this indicates that the gate blocks the skip connection such that
our encoder becomes similar to the proprioceptive model in this condition.
Small exteroceptive noise Large exteroceptive noise
terrain ours without gate ours without gate
rough 0.690±0.40 0.746±0.40 0.879±0.46 0.997±0.44
rough discrete 0.787±0.45 0.857±0.54 0.878±0.53 0.964±0.55
step stair 0.652±0.39 0.687±0.43 0.975±0.49 1.043±0.50
large step 0.719±0.40 0.855±0.43 1.142±0.55 1.225±0.54
grid steps 1.444±0.56 1.674±0.58 2.218±0.70 2.212±0.70
standard stair 0.854±0.67 0.961±0.72 1.387±0.59 1.438±0.56
open stair 0.842±0.61 0.938±0.65 1.356±0.55 1.428±0.53
ledged stair 0.819±0.39 0.929±0.42 1.373±0.53 1.416±0.54
boxes 0.928±0.53 1.123±0.56 1.614±0.64 1.683±0.68
random stair 0.872±0.45 0.956±0.46 1.489±0.59 1.526±0.58
Table S5. Reconstruction error of height samples under different noise conditions. The quantities are presented as empirical means with stan-
dard deviations. The belief encoder with the exteroceptive gate had smaller reconstruction error for all types of terrain. This shows the effective-
ness of the gated skip connection when the exteroception is reliable. When the noise is large, the gated encoder also performed better than the
non-gated encoder, although the difference was smaller than in the small-noise setting.
Small exteroceptive noise Large exteroceptive noise
terrain ours without gate ours without gate
rough 1.21E-03±2.8E-04 1.36E-03±6.1E-04 1.03E-03±2.3E-04 1.17E-03±5.9E-04
rough discrete 9.99E-04±3.3E-04 1.03E-03±3.9E-04 1.02E-03±3.5E-04 1.05E-03±3.5E-04
step stair 1.13E-03±4.4E-04 1.31E-03±4.7E-04 1.41E-03±4.3E-04 1.48E-03±4.6E-04
large step 1.37E-03±8.0E-04 2.03E-03±1.0E-03 1.95E-03±8.2E-04 1.95E-03±7.8E-04
grid steps 3.05E-03±4.1E-04 4.77E-03±7.4E-04 4.17E-03±5.0E-04 4.39E-03±5.1E-04
standard stair 2.59E-03±2.2E-03 3.11E-03±2.2E-03 2.68E-03±1.6E-03 2.69E-03±1.5E-03
open stair 2.61E-03±2.3E-03 3.06E-03±2.0E-03 2.63E-03±1.2E-03 2.64E-03±1.1E-03
ledged stair 2.53E-03±1.7E-03 3.03E-03±1.5E-03 2.62E-03±1.2E-03 2.63E-03±1.1E-03
boxes 2.13E-03±1.4E-03 3.38E-03±1.5E-03 3.00E-03±1.0E-03 3.09E-03±1.2E-03
random stair 2.31E-03±9.1E-04 2.89E-03±8.2E-04 2.72E-03±7.9E-04 2.74E-03±8.0E-04

===== PAGE 22 =====
Research Article ETH Zurich and Intel 22
A
B
Fig. S1. Comparison of the presented controller to a proprioceptive baseline [4] over random terrain. We collected 300 trials with a fixed veloc-
ity command over 41×41 different terrain parameter combinations and compared success rates. Our controller was able to traverse a much wider
range of terrain profiles on both grid steps (A) and stairs (B).
A Learning curves of student training
B Step traversal success rate
Small noise
Large noise
Fig. S2. Ablation analysis of the presented belief encoder. We compared GRU gate, GRU no gate, MLP gate and MLP no gate. MLP setting
uses MLP instead of GRU as its encoder. Gate setting uses proposed attention gate while no gate setting exclude it.(A) Learning curve of the
student policy training. GRU worked better than MLP in all cases. Attention gate worked better than without attention for both GRU and MLP.
The increase of the losses and decrease of reward in the beginning is due to the curriculum. (B) Step traversal success rate tested in small noise
and large noise cases. The robot is initialized with random joint configuration and initial velocity and given a constant command towards the step.
If the robot traversed the step with both front and hind legs it is considered as success. 100 trials were conducted.