===== PAGE 1 =====
DreamWaQ: Learning Robust Quadrupedal Locomotion With Implicit
Terrain Imagination via Deep Reinforcement Learning
I Made Aswin Nahrendra1, Byeongho Yu1, and Hyun Myung1∗, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Quadrupedal robots resemble the physical ability Training in simulation Context-aided Estimator Policy Network (Actor)
128×64×19 512×256×128×12
of legged animals to walk through unstructured terrains.
However, designing a controller for quadrupedal robots poses Temporal partial
$!,&! Policy gradient
observations
a significant challenge due to their functional complexity ("! ")
and requires adaptation to various terrains. Recently, deep Current obs. ("!)
reinforcement learning, inspired by how legged animals learn Value Network (Critic)
512×256×128×1
to walk from their experiences, has been utilized to synthe-
Privileged observations
size natural quadrupedal locomotion. However, state-of-the-art (!!)
methods strongly depend on a complex and reliable sensing
framework. Furthermore, prior works that rely only on pro-
prioception have shown a limited demonstration for overcoming Zero-shot sim-to-real
challenging terrains, especially for a long distance. This work
proposes a novel quadrupedal locomotion learning framework
$!,&!
that allows quadrupedal robots to walk through challenging "! " "! #!
terrains, even with limited sensing modalities. The proposed
Fig. 1: Overview of DreamWaQ. By learning a locomotion policy in a
framework was validated in real-world outdoor environments simulation, the robot can walk through challenging terrains such as stairs
with varying conditions within a single run for a long distance. with zero-shot sim-to-real.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, quadrupedal robots have played an important
conditions, and while a 3D LiDAR can be utilized to
role in various applications, such as industrial inspection
distinguish ground and traversable regions, accurately es-
and exploration [1]–[6]. Unlike wheeled mobile robots,
timating the physical characteristics of the terrain remains
quadrupedal robots can traverse unstructured terrains but are
challenging [16]–[18]. For instance, snow may appear as a
relatively difficult to control. Conventional model-based con-
solid and passable surface, but it is actually soft and pliable.
trollers often require a complex pipeline consisting of state
Additionally, tall grass that appears impassable to a camera
estimation, trajectory optimization, gait optimization, and
can still be easily traversed by legged robots.
actuator control [1]–[3], [7]–[11]. Such a complex model-
Meanwhile, proprioceptive sensors, such as an inertial
based pipeline requires considerable human effort for accu-
measurement unit (IMU) and joint encoder, are relatively
rate modeling and rigorous parameter tuning. Moreover, the
light and robust compared to exteroceptive sensors. Recent
linearized quadrupedal model often limits its performance,
works have shown that by combining different proprioception
hindering its full capability.
modalities, a quadrupedal robot can learn to estimate its
Legged animals can efficiently plan their gait by visually
surrounding terrain [19]–[23] and body state [24]. However,
perceiving the surrounding terrains. This natural mechanism
these works have a limited empirical demonstration for a
has inspired many works on training a perceptive locomotion
long-distance operation with various challenging terrains,
policy via deep reinforcement learning (RL) that can enable
where legged robots may fail due to high uncertainties and
a quadrupedal robot to traverse unstructured terrains [12]–
estimation errors.
[15]. In these frontier works, the robot is equipped with
Estimating the surrounding terrain’s properties via pro-
exteroceptive sensors such as a camera or LiDAR to observe
prioception while learning a locomotion policy requires
its surroundings. Subsequently, exteroception is used with the
an iterative process [19], [20], [23]. The policy needs to
controller to plan the robot’s trajectory and gait to traverse
understand the terrain properties to learn robust behavior.
through the environment safely.
However, to adequately learn the terrain properties, the robot
However, exteroception may not always be dependable.
should be able to walk accordingly and explore a wide
Cameras can malfunction in adverse weather and lighting
spectrum of terrain properties. This dilemma is often called
This work was supported by Korea Evaluation Institute of Industrial the representation learning bottleneck [25], which can hinder
Technology (KEIT) grant funded by the Korea Government (MOTIE) optimal policy learning. Therefore, a learning framework that
(No. 20018216, “Development of Mobile Intelligence SW for Autonomous
jointly learn a robust policy with an accurate environment
Navigation of Legged Robots in Dynamic and Atypical Environments for
Real Application”). The students are supported by BK21 FOUR. representation is required.
1The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering at Korea In this paper, we proposed a framework called Dream
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 34141,
Walking for Quadrupedal Robots (DreamWaQ), that trains
Republic of Korea. {anahrendra, bhyu, hmyung}@kaist.ac.kr
∗Corresponding Author: Hyun Myung a robust locomotion policy for quadrupedal robots with
3202
raM
3
]OR.sc[
2v20601.1032:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
only proprioception via a deep RL algorithm. DreamWaQ failure states in which the teacher policy has learned in the
trains a locomotion policy to implicitly infer the terrain early stage of learning using RL. This limitation is because,
properties, such as height map, friction, restitution, and during BC, the student policy is only provided with good
obstacles. Consequently, the robot can adapt its gait to walk action supervision from the teacher policy.
safely through various terrains. We deployed DreamWaQ on For learning implicit terrain imagination, we adopted an
a Unitree A1 [26] robot to robustly walk through challenging asymmetric actor-critic architecture [28]. We discovered that
natural and man-made environments. the interplay between the policy and value networks in actor-
In summary, the contributions of this work are threefold: critic algorithms is sufficient for learning a robust locomotion
1) A novel locomotion learning framework via an asym- policy that could implicitly imagine the privileged observa-
metric actor-critic architecture is proposed to implicitly tions, given partial temporal observations. In DreamWaQ,
imagine terrain properties using only proprioception. the policy (actor) receives temporal partial observations, oH t ,
2) A context-aided estimator network is proposed to es- as the input, while the value network (critic) receives the
timate body state and environmental context jointly. full state, s t , as shown in Fig. 1. In this work, we use
Together with the policy, our method outperforms H = 5. Consequently, the data efficiency during training
existing learning-based methods. is significantly increased because only one training phase
3) A robustness and durability evaluation of the learned is required. Moreover, the policy can explore all possible
policy in the real world was conducted through walking trajectories during training, increasing its robustness through
in diverse outdoor environments. To the best of our generalization. In this work, the policy is optimized using
knowledge, this is the first time a Unitree A1, which the proximal policy optimization (PPO) algorithm [29].
is significantly smaller that an ANYmal robot, has 1) Policy Network: The policy, π φ (a t |o t ,v t ,z t ) is a neural
been demonstrated to sustainably walk on challenging network parameterized by φ that infers an action a t , given
terrain such as hills and yards.1 a proprioceptive observation o t , body velocity v t , and latent
state z . o is measured directly from joint encoders and IMU,
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- t t
while v and z are estimated by a context-aided estimator
tion II discusses our proposed method thoroughly. Section III t t
network (CENet), which will be discussed in Section II-C.
presents the experimental setting, results, and an in-depth
o is an n × 1 vector defined as follows:
comparative analysis of the proposed and baseline methods. t
Finally, Section IV concludes this work and briefly discusses o = (cid:2) ω g c θ θ˙ a (cid:3)T , (1)
directions for future work. t t t t t t t−1
where ω , g , c , θ , θ˙ , and a are the body angular
II. DREAMWAQ t t t t t t−1
velocity, gravity vector in the body frame, body velocity
A. Preliminaries
command, joint angle, joint angular velocity, and previous
In this work, the environment is modeled as an action, respectively.
infinite-horizon partially observable Markov decision process 2) Value Network: The value network is trained to output
(POMDP), defined by the tuple M = (S,O,A,d 0 ,p,r,γ). an estimation of the state value, V (s t ). Unlike the policy, the
The full state, partial observation, and action are continuous, value network receives the privileged observation, s , which
t
and defined by s ∈ S, o ∈ O, and a ∈ A, respectively. The is defined as
environment starts with an initial state distribution, d (s );
0 0 (cid:2) (cid:3)T
s = o v d h , (2)
progresses with a state transition probability p(s |s ,a ); t t t t t
t+1 t t
and each transition is rewarded with a reward function,
where d is the disturbance force applied randomly on the
t
r : S × A → R. The discount factor is defined by
robot’s body and h is the height map scan of the robot’s
t
γ ∈ [0,1). Additionally, in this paper, we define a temporal
surroundings as an exteroceptive cue for the value network.
observation at time t over the past H measurements as
In the proposed DreamWaQ, the policy network is trained to
oH t = (cid:2) o t o t−1 ...o t−H (cid:3)T . We also define a context vector, implicitly infer d t and h t from proprioception.
z t , which contains a latent representation of the world state. 3) Action Space: The action space is a 12 × 1 vector,
The context vector is inferred using the method that will be a , corresponding to the desired joint angle of the robot. To
t
discussed in Section II-C. facilitate learning, we train the policy to infer the desired
joint angle around the robot’s stand still pose, θ . Hence,
B. Implicit Terrain Imagination stand
the robot’s desired joint angle is defined as
Recent works have leveraged the teacher-student training
paradigm [27]. Although it has been empirically shown that θ = θ + a . (3)
des stand t
the student policy is as good as the teacher’s, behavior
The desired joint angles are tracked using a proportional–
cloning (BC) bounds the student policy’s performance with
derivative (PD) controller for each joint.
the teacher policy [19], [20], [23]. Moreover, sequentially
4) Reward Function: Our reward function closely follows
training the teacher and student networks is data ineffi-
other works [12], [19], [20], [22], [24], [30] to highlight the
cient [24]. The student policy might be unable to explore
effect of DreamWaQ’s components instead of reward tuning.
1Project site: https://sites.google.com/view/dreamwaq The reward function consists of task rewards for tracking the

===== PAGE 3 =====
TABLE I: Reward function elements. exp(·) and var(·) are exponential Body velocity
and variance operators, respectively. (·)des and (·)cmd indicate the desired 3×1 𝐯 ! estimation model
and commanded values, respectively. x,y, and z are defined on the robot’s 𝐨" Body linear velocity(𝐯!)
b
vx
od
y
y
, ω
fr
y
a
a
m
w
e
,
,
h
w
,
i
p
th
f,z
x
,k
a
,
n
v
d
f,
z
xy
p
,k
oi
,
n
a
ti
n
n
d
g
τ
fo
a
r
r
w
e
a
t
r
h
d
e
a
g
n
r
d
av
u
it
p
y
w
v
a
e
r
c
d
t
,
or
re
p
s
r
p
o
e
j
c
e
t
c
i
t
v
e
e
d
ly
i
.
nt
g
o
, ! 𝐳
!
𝐨 !#$
𝐨! "
C
Te
o
m
nt
p
e
o
x
r
t
a
v
l
e
p
c
a
to
rt
r
i a
(
l
𝐳
o
!)
bservations
t h h e e ig r h o t b w ot . ’ r s .t. b t o h d e y g f r r o a u m nd e, , f li o n o e t a h r e v ig el h o t c , i f t o ie o s t i l n ate th ra e l x ve y lo p c l i a t n y, e, an y d aw joi r n a t te t , or b q o u d e y , 128×64×19 16×1 6 A 4 u × to 1 - 2 e 8 n × co 4 d 8 er model 𝐨!#$ Next partial observations
respectively.
Fig. 2: The architecture of CENet consists of a body velocity estimation
model and an auto-encoder model that shares a unified encoder. The shared
Reward Equation (ri) Weight (wi) encoder is trained to provide a robust body state and context estimation
Lin. velocity tracking exp (cid:8) −4(vc
x
m
y
d −vxy)2(cid:9) 1.0 jointly.
Ang. velocity tracking exp (cid:8) −4(ω
y
cm
aw
d −ωyaw)2(cid:9) 0.5
Linear velocity (z) v2 −2.0
z
Angular velocity (xy) ω2 −0.05 of only explicitly estimating the robot’s state, we propose
xy
Orientation |g|2 −0.2 a context-aided estimator network (CENet) architecture to
Joint accelerations θ¨2 −2.5×10−7 jointly learn to estimate and infer a latent representation of
Joint power |τ||θ˙| −2×10−5 the environment. The advantages of the proposed CENet are:
Body height (hdes −h)2 −1.0
Foot clearance (pd f e , s z,k −p f,z,k )2 ·v f,xy,k −0.01 1) the network architecture is significantly simplified and
Action rate (at −at−1)2 −0.01 runs synchronously during inference owing to the shared
Smoothness (at −2at−1 +at−2)2 −0.01 encoder architecture; 2) the encoder network can jointly learn
Power distribution var(τ ·θ˙)2 −10−5 the robot’s forward and backward dynamics via the auto-
encoding mechanism, hence, increasing its accuracy.
CENet consists of a single encoder and a multi-head
decoder architecture as shown in Fig. 2. The encoder network
commanded velocity and stability rewards to produce a stable
encodes oH into v and z . The first head estimates v ,
and natural locomotion behavior. The details of the reward t t t t
whereas the second reconstructs o . We leveraged a β-
function are presented in Table I. The total reward of the t+1
variational auto-encoder (β-VAE) [31]–[33] as the auto-
policy for taking an action at each state is given as:
encoder architecture. CENet is optimized using a hybrid loss
(cid:88)
r (s ,a ) = r w , (4) function, defined as follows:
t t t i i
L = L + L , (5)
where i is the index of each reward, as shown in Table I. CE est VAE
The complex reward function for learning a locomotion where L and L are the body velocity estimation and
est VAE
policy usually includes a motor power minimization term. VAE loss, respectively. For explicit state estimation, we
However, this reward minimizes the overall power with- employed a mean-squared-error (MSE) loss between the
out considering each motor’s power usage balance. Conse- estimated body velocity, ˜v , and the ground truth, v , from
t t
quently, in the long run, some motors might overheat faster the simulator as follows:
than others. Therefore, we introduced a power distribution
L = MSE(˜v ,v ). (6)
reward to reduce motor overheating in the real world by est t t
penalizing motors’ power with high variance over all motors The VAE network is trained with the standard β-VAE
used on the robot. loss, which consists of reconstruction and latent losses. We
5) Curriculum Learning: We utilized a game-inspired employed MSE for the reconstruction loss and Kullback-
curriculum [12] to ensure progressive locomotion policy Leibler (KL) divergence [34] as the latent loss. The VAE
learning over difficult terrains. The terrains consisted of loss is formulated as
smooth, rough, discretized, and stair terrains with ten levels
L = MSE(˜o ,o ) + βD (q(z |oH) (cid:107) p(z )), (7)
of inclination within [0°,22°]. Furthermore, we found that VAE t+1 t+1 KL t t t
utilizing the grid-adaptive curriculum [23] for low-speed where ˜o is the reconstructed next observation, q(z |oH)
t+1 t t
locomotion results in a better and more stable turning that is the posterior distribution of the z , given oH. p(z ) is
t t t
prevents foot tripping. the context’s prior distribution parameterized by a Gaussian
distribution. We chose a standard normal distribution for the
C. Context-Aided Estimator Network
prior distribution because all observations are normalized to
The policy trained using the method described in Sec- have a zero mean and unit variance.
tion II-B requires v and z as input, which can be estimated Additionally, bootstrapping from an estimator network
t t
from proprioception. Prior works estimate z as the latent during policy network training may increase the sim-to-
t
variable for understanding terrain properties [20], [21], [23]. real robustness of the learned policy [24]. However, we
Additionally, estimating v using a learned network signifi- discovered that bootstrapping may also harm the policy’s
t
cantly improves the locomotion policy’s robustness [24] by performance because of the large learning noise at the
eliminating the accumulated estimation drift. early stage of learning. Therefore, we propose an adaptive
Motivated by those prior works, we discovered that the bootstrapping (AdaBoot) method that adaptively tunes the
interplay between terrain and body state estimates signif- bootstrapping probability during training. AdaBoot is con-
icantly improves body state estimation accuracy. Instead trolled by the coefficient of variation (CV), i.e., the ratio of

===== PAGE 4 =====
TABLE II: Domain randomization ranges applied in the simulation.
the standard deviation to the mean, of the episodic reward
over m domain-randomized environments. The key idea is
Parameter Randomization range Unit
that bootstrapping is required when the CV of m agents’
Payload [−1,2] kg
rewards is small to make the policy more robust against Kp factor [0.9,1.1] Nm/rad
inaccurate estimation. However, it should not bootstrap when
Kd factor [0.9,1.1] Nms/rad
Motor strength factor [0.9,1.1] Nm
the agents have not learned well enough, as indicated by Center of mass shift [−50,50] mm
Friction coefficient [0.2,1.25] -
a large CV in their rewards. We define the bootstrapping
System delay [0.0,15.0] ms
probability for each learning iteration as follows:
p = 1 − tanh(CV (R)), (8)
boot
where p ∈ [0,1] is the bootstrapping probability and R
boot
is an m×1 vector of episodic rewards from m domain-
randomized environments. CV (·), and tanh(·) are coefficient
of variation and hyperbolic tangent operations, respectively.
tanh is used to smoothly upper-bounds CV (R) to one.
Fig. 3: Learning curves of different algorithms. The results shown are
III. EXPERIMENTS obtained from ten different random seeds. The curves and shaded regions
indicate the mean and standard deviation of the reward over ten different
seeds, respectively. The oracle policy has access to the height map mea-
A. Compared Methods surement of the robot’s surroundings as in [12].
For a comparative evaluation, we compared the following
algorithms with access to proprioceptions only:
algorithm took approximately one hour to generate data equal
1) Baseline [12]: The policy was trained without any
to approximately 46 days of training in the real world.
adaptation mechanism.
Fig. 3 compares the learning curves of DreamWaQ against
2) AdaptationNet [20], [21]: The policy was trained
those of all the other methods for learning the locomotion
with an implicit environmental factor encoder using
policy of a Unitree A1 robot. It can be seen that even though
the student-teacher training framework. The policy
EstimatorNet initially has a higher mean episodic reward
network consists of 1D convolutional neural network
than AdaptationNet, its performance plummets after more
(CNN) layers and multilayer perceptron (MLP) layers.
iterations because it encounters more difficult terrains after
3) EstimatorNet [24]: The policy was concurrently
longer training iterations. Conversely, DreamWaQ consis-
trained with an estimator network that explicitly es-
tently outperforms all the other methods. Moreover, despite
timates the body state without a context estimation.
walking without exteroception, DreamWaQ performs almost
4) DreamWaQ w/o AdaBoot: The proposed method
as well as the oracle policy that has direct access to the
without adaptive bootstrapping.
surrounding terrain’s height map.
5) DreamWaQ w/ AdaBoot: The proposed method with
adaptive bootstrapping. C. Real-World Experimental Setup
All the methods above were trained using the curriculum Real-world experiments were conducted using a Unitree
strategy and reward functions detailed in Section II. For a A1 [26] robot. All estimation and control processes were
fair comparison, we used the same network architecture and run on an Intel NUC mounted on top of the robot and we
fixed the initial random seeds for all methods. All networks used the PyBind interface provided in [38] to send the joint
used exponential linear units (ELUs) [35] as the activation angle command to the robot. An additional onboard PC with
functions for the hidden layers a battery added a payload of approximately 500 g to the
robot. During inference, the policy runs synchronously with
B. Simulation
the CENet at 50 Hz. The desired joint angles were tracked
We used the Isaac Gym simulator [36] based on the using a PD controller with proportional and derivative gains
open-source implementation of [12] to synchronously train of K = 28 and K = 0.7, respectively at 200 Hz.
p d
the policy, value, and CENet networks for 1,000 iterations.
D. Command Tracking
We trained 4,096 agents domain-randomized agents in par-
allel. The details of the randomized parameters are listed We evaluated the command tracking performance in a
in Table II. For all algorithms, the policy network was Gazebo simulation to obtain accurate ground truth. The
trained using PPO with clipping range, generalized advantage robot was given random commands for ten minutes, and the
estimation factor, and discount factor of 0.2, 0.95, and 0.99, commands were uniformly sampled from [−1.0,1.0] every
respectively. The networks were optimized using the Adam ten seconds. For fair comparison, random commands were
optimizer [37] with a learning rate of 10−3. generated using the same random seed for each controller.
All training was performed on a desktop PC with an Intel Each controller was run five times with different random
Core i7-8700 CPU @ 3.20 GHz, 32 GB RAM, and an seeds to verify repeatability. We measured absolute tracking
NVIDIA RTX 3060Ti GPU. Training using the DreamWaQ error (ATE) as the performance metric and constructed a

===== PAGE 5 =====
rorre
gnikcarT
TABLE III: Robustness test. Bold values indicate results with the most
robust performance.
Algorithm Max. push (m/s) Survival rate (%)
Baseline 0.511±0.053 20.51±6.44
AdaptationNet 0.714±0.096 82.37±2.49
EstimatorNet 0.871±0.124 80.92±5.73
DreamWaQ w/o AdaBoot 1.015±0.121 90.71±1.25
DreamWaQ w/ AdaBoot 1.121±0.164 95.23±1.61
𝑣! " 𝑣# " 𝜔$ "
Fig. 4: Command tracking error represented as a boxplot. ve and ve are
x y
forward and lateral velocity tracking errors, respectively, measured in m/s. sampled from [−vmax,vmax], where vmax ≥0 is the maximum
ωe is yaw rate tracking error measured in rad/s. The ∗∗∗∗ annotations push push push
z
indicate measurements with p-value<10−4. push speed. We also measured the survival rate, i.e., the
percentage of the robot’s survival time within 30 minutes of a
random walk. The result of the robustness test is summarized
in Table III.
In all methods, the robot mostly fell when there was
Foot stumble a significant change in the command vector, requiring the
robot to brake and alter its movement quickly. Nevertheless,
DreamWaQ is significantly more robust than all the other
methods, as quantitatively verified by the high survival rate
Fig. 5: Estimation error of CENet and EstimatorNet. The superiority of
and maximum push that it can withstand. The robust perfor-
CENet is highlighted when the robot’s feet stumbled by stairs.
mance was achieved through the interplay between accurate
estimation and robust policy learning of DreamWaQ. More-
barplot, as shown in Fig. 4. The significance of the improve- over, the proposed AdaBoot method also increases robustness
ment obtained by DreamWaQ against other methods was without sacrificing the base performance.
measured using paired t-test, as shown in Fig. 4, indicat- In the real world, DreamWaQ’s policy is robust against
ing that DreamWaQ consistently outperforms the baselines. unstructured terrains. Fig. 6 shows the robot’s foot reflex
Moreover, the proposed AdaBoot method also significantly when faced with foot stumbling and slipping. The robot can
improved DreamWaQ, owing to its statistical bootstrapping immediately adapt its gait and stabilize its pose. Owing to
strategy during training. the robust and accurate CENet, the robot had no problem in
its body velocity estimation and could continue its journey
E. Explicit Estimation Comparison
without any performance deterioration.
We simulated the robot walking in a stairs environment In Fig. 6(a), the robot exhibits different gaits for going
to compare the CENet with EstimatorNet in terms of their downstairs and upstairs. When going downstairs, the robot
squared estimation error, as shown in Fig. 5. In the normal tends to tilt its body closer to the ground and maintain its
walk condition, CENet shows small errors on the flat terrain, front foot far from the body, which is a key gait pattern
thanks to the forward-backward dynamics learning enabled for quickly finding a stable foothold. Meanwhile, the robot
by the VAE’s auto-encoding mechanism. adapts its gait for going upstairs by significantly increasing
The strength of CENet is highlighted when the robot stum- its footsteps. This gait is necessary so that the foot can safely
bles down the stairs, where the EstimatorNet fails to estimate overcome the stairs and find a stable foothold while climbing.
the body velocity accurately. In severe cases, inaccurate Moreover, Fig. 6(b) shows the adaptation to slipping, where
estimation can lead to catastrophic failure. Conversely, the the robot can immediately detect irregular footholds and
CENet can accurately estimate the body velocity, enabling adapt its gait pattern. Subsequently, the robot tries to recover
the robot to climb the stairs safely. We hypothesize that this its normal pattern and continues to walk.
is made possible by two factors: 1) the forward-backward
dynamics learning provides more accurate estimation in all
G. Long-Distance Walk
terrains, and 2) using DreamWaQ, the encoder is jointly
trained to predict the terrain properties; hence, it can im- We deployed the robot on two challenging outdoor courses
plicitly reason about the terrain properties, which helps in to demonstrate the robustness of DreamWaQ. Course A was
conditioning the explicit estimation. an on-campus yard consisting of many slopes and deformable
terrains. Course B was an on-campus hill with an elevation
F. Robustness Analysis
gain of up to 22 m. Courses A and B have a total length of
To test the learned policy’s robustness, we perturbed the 430 m and 465 m, respectively. The details of the courses are
robot in the simulation with random pushes by applying shown in Fig. 7. The robot’s trajectory was measured using a
random velocities with random directions along the x, y, and real-time kinematic (RTK) GPS [39] with a frequency of 10
z axes of the robot’s body frame with a one-second interval Hz, mounted on top of the robot. For complete experiment
until it fell. The random push velocities were uniformly videos, please refer to the project site1.

===== PAGE 6 =====
(a) elbmuts
tooF
pils
tooF
(a)
Go downstairs Normal walk Climb upstairs Normal walk
Normal walk
(b)
Normal walk Irregular foothold Adaptation Recovery
Fig. 6: Foot reflex against uncertainties due to (a) stumbling and (b) slipping in unstructured terrains. Real-time experiment videos are available online1.
A Start B Finish
Finish
Start
Fig. 7: The outdoor trajectory for testing the performance of the DreamWaQ policy was recorded using an RTK–GPS mounted on the robot. Course A
consists of many unstructured natural terrains in yards, while course B is a hiking track. The elevations of both courses relative to the starting point (in
[m]) are shown in the color bars.
1) Course A: The robot was challenged in unstructured to reduce the required torque. Due to the climbing operation,
natural tracks with various slopes in this course. The robot the front legs’ motors may easily overheat, and the motor
also encountered thick vegetation that trapped the robot’s enters the overheat protection mode. Nevertheless, using
legs. However, the robot successfully adapted its speed by DreamWaQ, our robot could climb the hill, completing a 465
increasing joint power to overcome the trap. m trajectory within 10 minutes and reach the hill’s summit1.
The most challenging part of this course is walking
through stairs and deformable slopes. Thanks to the robust-
IV. CONCLUSION
ness of the policy and accurate estimation of DreamWaQ, In this work, we introduced DreamWaQ, a robust
the robot could safely walk through the stairs and slopes. quadrupedal locomotion framework that enables quadrupedal
We conducted the experiments not only in dry but also in robots to traverse unstructured terrains by relying solely on
wet terrain conditions after rainfall. While walking down the proprioception. DreamWaQ showed improved performance
stairs, the robot faced slippery stairs. Moreover, the robot’s compared to existing learning-based controllers, and its
feet stepped deeper to the ground on the slopes because of robustness was demonstrated on a Unitree A1 robot that
the mud. Nevertheless, our robot, controlled by DreamWaQ, walked on hills and unstructured yards for approximately
walked through the wet terrain without any difficulties1. ten minutes. DreamWaQ’s limitation lies in its adaptation
2) Course B: Course B challenged the robot to climb mechanism, where it must first hit the obstacles with its
a moderately high hill. This hiking track consists of man- legs. Addressing more complex structures, such as high-rise
made asphalt terrain, gravel, and slopes. The experiments stairs, is a part of our future work, which requires integrating
were conducted during summer, and the motors heated up exteroception into the locomotion system for improved gait
quickly. Therefore, we commanded the robot to move slowly planning prior to obstacle contact.

===== PAGE 7 =====
REFERENCES [19] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter,
“Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Science
[1] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, Robotics, vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020.
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, et al., “ANYmal – [20] A. Kumar, Z. Fu, D. Pathak, and J. Malik, “RMA: Rapid motor
A highly mobile and dynamic quadrupedal robot,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ adaptation for legged robots,” in Proc. Robotics: Science and Systems,
international Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2021.
2016, pp. 38–44. [21] Z. Fu, A. Kumar, J. Malik, and D. Pathak, “Minimizing energy
[2] B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, and S. Kim, “Mini cheetah: A platform for consumption leads to the emergence of gaits in legged robots,” in
pushing the limits of dynamic quadruped control,” in Proc. IEEE Proc. Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021, pp. 928–937.
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019, [22] A. Escontrela, X. B. Peng, W. Yu, T. Zhang, A. Iscen, K. Goldberg,
pp. 6295–6301. and P. Abbeel, “Adversarial motion priors make good substitutes for
[3] Y.-H. Shin, S. Hong, S. Woo, J. Choe, H. Son, G. Kim, J.-H. Kim, complex reward functions,” arXiv:2203.15103, 2022.
K. Lee, J. Hwangbo, and H.-W. Park, “Design of KAIST HOUND, a [23] G. B. Margolis, G. Yang, K. Paigwar, T. Chen, and P. Agrawal, “Rapid
quadrupedrobotplatformforfastandefficientlocomotionwithmixed- locomotion via reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Robotics: Science
integer nonlinear optimization of a gear train,” in Proc. International and Systems, 2022.
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2022, pp. 6614– [24] G. Ji, J. Mun, H. Kim, and J. Hwangbo, “Concurrent training of a
6620. control policy and a state estimator for dynamic and robust legged
[4] C. Gehring, P. Fankhauser, L. Isler, R. Diethelm, S. Bachmann, locomotion,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp.
M. Potz, L. Gerstenberg, and M. Hutter, “ANYmal in the field: 4630–4637, 2022.
Solving industrial inspection of an offshore HVDC platform with a [25] A.Zhang,R.McAllister,R.Calandra,Y.Gal,andS.Levine,“Learning
quadrupedal robot,” in Field and Service Robotics, G. Ishigami and invariant representations for reinforcement learning without recon-
K. Yoshida, Eds. Singapore: Springer, 2021, ch. 16, pp. 247–260. struction,” in Proc. International Conference on Learning Represen-
[5] M. Tranzatto, T. Miki, M. Dharmadhikari, L. Bernreiter, M. Kulkarni, tations (ICLR), 2021.
F. Mascarich, O. Andersson, S. Khattak, M. Hutter, R. Siegwart, [26] “Unitree A1,” accessed on 2022.08.24. [Online]. Available: https:
et al., “CERBERUS in the DARPA subterranean challenge,” Science //m.unitree.com/products/a1
Robotics, vol. 7, no. 66, p. eabp9742, 2022. [27] D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, and P. Krähenbühl, “Learning by
[6] E. M. Lee, D. Seo, J. Jeon, and H. Myung, “QR-SCAN: Traversable cheating,” in Proc. Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2020, pp.
region scan for quadruped robot exploration using lightweight precom- 66–75.
puted trajectory,” in Proc. 21st International Conference on Control, [28] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
Automation and Systems (ICCAS), 2021, pp. 957–961. “Asymmetric actor critic for image-based robot learning,” in Proc.
[7] Y. Kim, B. Yu, E. M. Lee, J.-H. Kim, H.-W. Park, and H. Myung, Robotics: Science and Systems, 2018.
“STEP: State estimator for legged robots using a preintegrated foot [29] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
velocity factor,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
pp. 4456–4463, 2022. [30] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
[8] M. Bloesch, C. Gehring, P. Fankhauser, M. Hutter, M. A. Hoepflinger, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills
and R. Siegwart, “State estimation for legged robots on unstable for legged robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019.
and slippery terrain,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on [31] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,”
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013, pp. 6058–6064. arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
[32] I. Higgins, L. Matthey, A. Pal, C. Burgess, X. Glorot, M. Botvinick,
[9] C. Gehring, C. D. Bellicoso, P. Fankhauser, S. Coros, and M. Hutter,
S. Mohamed, and A. Lerchner, “β – VAE: Learning basic visual con-
“Quadrupedal locomotion using trajectory optimization and hierarchi-
cal whole body control,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on cepts with a constrained variational framework,” in Proc. International
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017, pp. 4788–4794. Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
[33] C. P. Burgess, I. Higgins, A. Pal, L. Matthey, N. Watters, G. Des-
[10] C. D. Bellicoso, F. Jenelten, P. Fankhauser, C. Gehring, J. Hwangbo,
jardins, and A. Lerchner, “Understanding disentangling in β – VAE,”
and M. Hutter, “Dynamic locomotion and whole-body control for
Advances in Neural Information Processing (NeurIPS) Workshop on
quadrupedal robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Learning Disentangled Representations, 2017.
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017, pp. 3359–3365.
[34] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” The
[11] F. Jenelten, R. Grandia, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “TAMOLS:
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951.
Terrain-aware motion optimization for legged systems,” IEEE Trans-
[35] D.-A. Clevert, T. Unterthiner, and S. Hochreiter, “Fast and accurate
actions on Robotics, 2022, doi:10.1109/TRO.2022.3186804.
deep network learning by exponential linear units (ELUs),” in Proc.
[12] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning,” in
[36] V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Mack-
Proc. Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2022, pp. 91–100.
lin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, A. Allshire, A. Handa, et al., “Isaac
[13] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter,
Gym: High performance GPU-based physics simulation for robot
“Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the
learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Track
wild,” Science Robotics, vol. 7, no. 62, p. eabk2822, 2022.
on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
[14] Z. Fu, A. Kumar, A. Agarwal, H. Qi, J. Malik, and D. Pathak,
[37] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
“Coupling vision and proprioception for navigation of legged robots,”
tion,” in Proc. International Conference on Learning Representations
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
(ICLR), 2015.
Recognition (CVPR), 2022, pp. 17273–17283.
[38] X.B.Peng,E.Coumans,T.Zhang,T.-W.E.Lee,J.Tan,andS.Levine,
[15] W. Yu, D. Jain, A. Escontrela, A. Iscen, P. Xu, E. Coumans, S. Ha,
“Learning agile robotic locomotion skills by imitating animals,” in
J. Tan, and T. Zhang, “Visual-locomotion: Learning to walk on
Robotics: Science and Systems, 07 2020.
complex terrains with vision,” in Proc. Conference on Robot Learning
[39] “H-RTK F9P Helical GPS,” accessed on 2022.09.02. [Online].
(CoRL), 2021, pp. 1291–1302.
Available: http://www.holybro.com/product/h-rtk-f9p/
[16] H. Lim, M. Oh, and H. Myung, “Patchwork: concentric zone-based
region-wise ground segmentation with ground likelihood estimation
using a 3D LiDAR sensor,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6458–6465, 2021.
[17] M. Oh, E. Jung, H. Lim, W. Song, S. Hu, E. M. Lee, J. Park, J. Kim,
J. Lee, and H. Myung, “TRAVEL: Traversable ground and above-
ground object segmentation using graph representation of 3D LiDAR
scans,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 7255–
7262, 2022.
[18] S. Lee, H. Lim, and H. Myung, “Patchwork++: Fast and robust
ground segmentation solving partial under-segmentation using 3D
point cloud,” arXiv:2207.11919, 2022.