===== PAGE 1 =====
Learning Humanoid Locomotion with Perceptive Internal Model
Junfeng Long∗, Junli Ren∗, Moji Shi∗, Zirui Wang, Tao Huang, Ping Luo, Jiangmiao Pang
Abstract—In contrast to quadruped robots that can navi- on real-world robots. While these approaches successfully
gate diverse terrains using a “blind” policy, humanoid robots enable humanoid robots to walk on flat surfaces and mildly
require accurate perception for stable locomotion due to their
uneven terrains such as low stairs, they often end up falling
high degrees of freedom and inherently unstable morphology.
and can not handle more challenging scenarios. Humanoid
However, incorporating perceptual signals often introduces
additional disturbances to the system, potentially reducing its Parkour Learning [10] exploits perceptive information but is
robustness, generalizability, and efficiency. This paper presents not able to overcome terrains requiring fine-grained footholds
the Perceptive Internal Model (PIM), which relies on onboard, such as continuous stairs.
continuously updated elevation maps centered around the robot
to perceive its surroundings. We train the policy using ground-
This paper presents the Perceptive Internal Model (PIM),
truth obstacle heights surrounding the robot in simulation,
optimizing it based on the Hybrid Internal Model (HIM), and which relies on onboard, continuously updated elevation
perform inference with heights sampled from the constructed maps centered around the robot to perceive its surroundings.
elevation map. Unlike previous methods that directly encode It is built upon the Hybrid Internal Model (HIM) [3],
depth maps or raw point clouds, our approach allows the robot which uses batch-level contrastive learning to optimize the
to perceive the terrain beneath its feet clearly and is less affected
simulated robot’s response, incorporating both explicit ve-
by camera movement or noise. Furthermore, since depth map
rendering is not required in simulation, our method introduces locity and implicit latent, to the robot’s successor state. To
minimal additional computational costs and can train the policy incorporate perceptive information, PIM directly uses the
in 3 hours on an RTX 4090 GPU. We verify the effectiveness ground-truth obstacle height maps surrounding the robot as
of our method across various humanoid robots, various indoor
additional observations to train the policy in simulation.
and outdoor terrains, stairs, and various sensor configurations.
During inference, we construct the elevation map using a
Our method can enable a humanoid robot to continuously climb
stairs and has the potential to serve as a foundational algorithm LiDAR or RGB-D camera and sample points from it to align
for the development of future humanoid control methods. with the policy’s observations.
I. INTRODUCTION
In contrast to previous methods that directly encode depth
The control methods for legged robots have advanced
maps or raw point clouds, PIM advances in: (a) It benefits
rapidly in recent years [1], [2], driven by robot learning tech-
from HIM, which supports batch-level learning, single-stage
niques such as reinforcement learning and simulation-to-real
training, and high training efficiency. (b) The elevation map
transfer. Among these methods, “blind” policies, which rely
accounts for the robot’s odometry and continuously main-
solely on proprioceptive information as observations, have
tains a larger local map, allowing the robot to clearly perceive
proven effective in enabling quadruped robots to achieve
the terrain beneath its feet. Compared to raw sensory data,
robust and agile locomotion across various terrains [3], [4],
it is more robust to sensor movement and noise. (c) Ren-
[5].
dering depth images in simulation incurs additional costs in
Due to the higher degrees of freedom and inherently unsta-
both computational memory and efficiency, whereas directly
ble morphology of humanoid robots, it is significantly more
querying terrain heights does not. Furthermore, mitigating
difficult to achieve stable locomotion across diverse terrains
the domain gap between simulated depth maps and real cam-
using a single policy, making the integration of perceptual
era data is challenging. As a result, our method introduces
information essential. However, considering that incorporat-
minimal additional computational costs and completes policy
ing perceptual signals may introduce additional disturbances
training within 3 hours on an RTX 4090 GPU.
and costs to the system, potentially compromising its robust-
ness, generalizability, and efficiency, most recent efforts in
We verify the effectiveness of our proposed method across
humanoid locomotion have followed the “blind” policy [6],
various humanoid robots, including Unitree H1 and Fourier
[7], [8] or a two-phase training paradigm [9], [10]. They may
GR-1, on a range of challenging indoor and outdoor terrains,
rely on prior motion trajectories [11], [12], [13] or multi-
such as stairs, gaps, and high platforms, and with different
stage, computationally expensive training processes [9] to
sensor configurations, including Mid-360 LiDAR and Re-
execute human-like locomotion actions that can be deployed
alSense D435+T265 cameras. Our method enables humanoid
robots to navigate a variety of difficult terrains with a natural
All authors are with Shanghai AI Laboratory. * denotes equal contri-
bution. Junli Ren and Ping Luo are with the University of Hong Kong. gait and a high success rate. It achieves a success rate of over
Zirui Wang is with Zhejiang University. Tao Huang is with Shanghai 90% when continuously climbing stairs. We hope that PIM
Jiao Tong University. Corresponding author: Jiangmiao Pang (pangjiang-
can serve as a foundational algorithm for the development
miao@gmail.com). Project Page: https://junfeng-long.github.
io/PIM/. of future humanoid control algorithms.
4202
voN
12
]OR.sc[
1v68341.1142:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
Fig. 1: We propose a perceptive humanoid locomotion policy capable of mastering various challenging terrains. This policy
requires only a few hours of single-stage training and can be deployed on hardware in a zero-shot manner. By integrating
a LiDAR-based elevation map, we achieve accurate perception without the need for historical vision embedding.
II. RELATED WORK in these studies, subsequent research has indicated that
learning from scratch can also yield coordinated whole-body
A. Learning Humanoid Locomotion
movement [20], [10], especially when the task is focused on
The rise of the humanoid robot industry has motivated traversing challenging terrains.
extensive research of humanoid locomotion in the past On the other hand, learning a robust legged locomotion
year [11], [9], [13], [14], [6], [15], [16], [12], [17], [8], [18], policy requires the prediction of accurate robot states from
[7], [19], [20], [21], [10], a majority of these researches accessible observations. Given that humanoid robots typ-
follows the ”training in simulation & Sim2Real transfer” ically have higher dimensions of action and observation
procedure, akin to the methods employed in quadruped re- space, recent works have proposed different training dia-
search. Indeed, when it comes to humanoid robots, there is an grams to address this issue: [8] incorporates linear veloc-
emphasis on performing human-like movements [12], [22]. ity into observations from a separate state estimator, [10],
To achieve this, [11], [7], [13] utilize prior motion trajectories [9] encompasses multi-stage training process to narrow the
to learn natural whole-body motion while walking on diverse sim2real gap, [6] predicts the states from observation as part
flat grounds. Despite the expressive motions demonstrated of a denoising process.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Unlike the previous works, we introduce a novel loco- information includes its joint position θ , joint velocity θ˙ ,
t t
motion policy that accomplishes state prediction utilizing base angular velocity ω and gravity direction in robot
t
perceptive information, thereby eliminating the necessity frame g . The perceptive information p is an elevation
t t
for additional training stages or explicit decoding of the map around the robot. We divide these observations into
predicted states. two parts, non-perceptive part on and perceptive part op,
t t
i.e. on = [c ,ω ,g ,θ ,θ˙ ,a ] and op = [p ]. Unlike the
B. Perceptive Legged Locomotion t t t t t t t−1 t t
policy, the critic is allowed to access privileged information
Previous research on quadrupeds has formulated several such as the linear velocity v of the robot at the training stage
t
successful systems that introduce exteroceptive sensors into and provide a more accurate estimation of state values.
the locomotion policy [23], [24], [25], [26]. These policies,
which either receive heightmaps or depth images, have C. Preliminary: Hybrid Internal Model
demonstrated that integrating a more comprehensive vision HIM (Hybrid Internal Model) [3] provides accurate state
system and vision observations into the policy results in bet- estimation and sim2real ability. Basically, HIM estimates the
ter performance on challenging terrains [27]. In the context robot’s linear velocity in the next timestep and propriocep-
of humanoid robots, while the aforementioned blind policies tive information in a latent space given its proprioceptive
have demonstrated robust performance on various surfaces observation history. The linear velocity estimation is trained
[7], against disturbances [11], [12], and on simple stairs [6], with simple regression to the ground truth linear velocity
a comprehensive vision-aided policy is necessary to achieve obtained from the simulator. The next step proprioceptive in-
perceptive locomotion. A significant challenge in perceptive formation prediction is trained through contrastive learning.
locomotion is reducing the perception gap during sim2real HIM considers a pair of on and on from the same
t+1 t−H:t
transfer. Existing research [10] employs an extra phase of trajectory as a positive pair and others as negative pairs. The
training to simulate the extensive hardware noise. However, pairs are optimized by swapping assignments tasks similar
this approach compromises perception accuracy and prevents to SwAV[29].
the policy from accomplishing tasks that demand more
D. Perceptive Internal Model
precise perception, such as stair climbing.
Compared to existing methods, we propose a more com- a) Elevation Maps: In the real-world experiments, we
prehensive perceptive locomotion system that achieves more employ the elevation map module [27] to capture perceptive
precise hardware perception by incorporating a LiDAR- observations as demonstrated in Fig. 3. It requires both
based elevation map. The integration of a robot-centered odometry and the ground point cloud to generate a grid-
elevation map eliminates the need for introducing vision based representation of ground heights. Unlike applications
into the historical observation sequence and achieves a more involving quadrupeds, it is critical to ensure that the z-
comprehensive state prediction. Extensive experiments on axis of the map frame aligns with the direction of gravity.
terrains involving stairs, gaps, and platforms underscore the Thus, we implement an initial rotation of the map frame to
superiority of the proposed method compared to existing ensure alignment with the average acceleration direction(i.e.
studies. gravity direction). Additionally, the point cloud is processed
to filter out points based on height, preserving only the
III. METHODOLOGY
ground points. The filtered point cloud and odometry data are
A. Framework Overview then inputted into the elevation map module to produce the
Compared to quadruped robots, humanoid robots have grid-based height map in the map frame. We test elevation
significantly lower stability due to their morphology. The maps with two sensor setups: the first setup utilized a single
perceptive information is necessary for the control system. Mid-360 LiDAR to provide both odometry, integrated via
It needs to determine the movements of its actuators for FAST-LIO [30], [31], and point cloud data. The second setup
a desired velocity given its proprioceptive information and employed a Realsense T265 camera for odometry and a
perceptive information. We model the humanoid locomotion Realsense D435 camera for point cloud acquisition. While
task as a sequential decision problem. The entire framework both setups provide accurate elevation maps during stable
is depicted in Fig. 2, we construct a perceptive internal model locomotion, the LiDAR-based setup demonstrated enhanced
that utilizes both proprioceptive information and perceptive robustness in scenarios involving rapid or irregular move-
information for state estimation and optimize the policy with ments.
PPO [28]. b) Elevation Sampling: We sample 96 points in the
frame of the robot aligning its z-axis to the negative direction
B. Observations
of gravity. The points are distributed in a 0.8m × 1.2m
The policy observations o consist of commands, pro- square with the robot as the center. These points’ relative
t
prioceptive information, perceptive information, and action z coordinates to the base link are used as our perceptive
of last timestep a . The commands are the desired ve- input.
t−1
locity c = [vc,vc,ωc ] indicates the linear velocity in c) Terrain-based Perceptive Internal Model: To make
t x y yaw
longitudinal and lateral directions, and the angular velocity the most of perceptive information, we not only let the
in the horizontal direction, respectively. The proprioceptive policy use it for foothold planning but also use it for state

===== PAGE 4 =====
Perception & Proprioception Framework Overview Perception Alignment
& Sim-to-Real
𝐨 p 𝐨n
t 𝑡+1
Target Encoder lT
t
Target Observations Contrastive
Learning Loss
Critic
𝑉
𝐨 p 𝐨n Network t
t t−H:𝑡
መl
t
S
Policy
Perceptive Gradient Loss
Source Encoder Policy
a
𝐯ො t Network t
Perceptive Internal
Source Observations Model Optimization Proximal Policy Optimization
Fig. 2: Overview of our framework. Within PIM, we integrate perceptive information into the state predictor to achieve more
comprehensive and accurate state prediction. A LiDAR-based elevation map serves as the perception model, enabling more
precise perception alignment between simulation and real-world environments.
LiDAR Link the robot’s arm, and joints of the robot’s waist. We set the
range of these joints to zero and increase their range as the
training goes on.
F. Symmetry Regularization
Torso Link
Map Frame We also introduce a symmetry regularization technique
similar to [32] to improve the harmony of the gait. In
detail, we involve three operators: Gn which flips the robot’s
o
proprioceptive observation with respect to the x-z plane, Gp
o
which flips the robot’s perceptive observation with respect
15cm stairs to the x-z plane, and G which flips the robot’s action with
a
respect to the x-z plane. Then during optimization of PIM,
we augment the data with G . During policy optimization,
o
we involve two additional losses:
Lpolicy = MSE(G (π(on,op,PIM(on ,op)),
Fig. 3: Terrian Perception module implemented by a single symmetry a t t t−H:t t
π(Gn(on),Gp(op),PIM(Gn(on ),Gp(op)))
LiDAR. The map frame overlaps the initial position of the o t o t o t−H:t o t
torso link and is fixed with the world. The colored grid map Lvalue = MSE(V (on,op),V (Gn(on),Gp(op)))
symmetry t t o t o t
demonstrates the height of the terrain in the map frame. (1)
estimation, which we concluded as PIM (Perceptive Internal
G. Training Process
Model). PIM is similar to HIM, however, instead of using
proprioceptive observation history to estimate the robot’s At each time, the proprioception observation history
next state, current perceptive observation op is concatenated on and perceptive observation op are fed into the
t t−H:t t
with the proprioceptive observation history on to provide perceptive internal model to obtain an estimation of the
t−H:t
more information for more accurate estimation of next-step robot’s linear velocity vˆ and a latent variable l predicting
t+1 t
state since terrain plays an important role in robot state the robot’s next proprioception information. Then they are
transfer. The effectiveness is shown in Section IV-A. fed into the policy network with current observation o to
t
obtain action a . During the policy optimization process,
t
E. Action Curriculum
the perceptive internal model is frozen and we only update
We introduce a curriculum on action space to simplify the the policy network and value network using PPO. After
training. To be more specific, we choose some of the joints policy optimization, we will use the collected trajectories
that are less important in the locomotion task, i.e., joints of to optimize the perceptive internal model.

===== PAGE 5 =====
H. Reward Functions
Fourier GR-1 Unitree H1
Our reward functions guide the robot to follow certain ve-
165 cm Height 180 cm Height
locity commands and maintain soft contact with the ground.
Besides some reward functions borrowed from quadrupedal 55 Kg Weight 47 Kg Weight
locomotion, we designed some new rewards for humanoid
locomotion. For example, we wish that the distance of two 4DoFArm 4DoFArm
feet is not too close, then we involve the reward called feet
lateral distance, which computes the lateral distance of two 3DoF Waist 1DoF Waist
feet in the robot’s frame and penalizes distance closer than
d . We also wish that the feet of the humanoid robot are 6DoF Leg 5DoF Leg
min
parallel to the ground, so we use a reward function called feet
ground parallel by adding five sample points on each foot of Fig. 4: Robot Hardware Setups in terms of Height, Weight,
the humanoid robot, indicating the front, middle, hind, left and Degree of Freedom (DoF)
and right, then penalize the variance of distances of these
sample points to the ground. Detailed reward functions are
listed in Table I.
TABLE I: Rewards
Reward Equation (ri) Weight (wi)
Lin. velocity tracking exp (cid:26) − ∥vx cm y d −vxy∥2 2 (cid:27) 1.0
σ
Ang. velocity tracking exp (cid:40) − (cid:16) ωy cm aw d −ωyaw (cid:17)2(cid:41) 1.0
σ
Linear velocity (z) v2 -0.5
z
Angular velocity (xy) ∥ωxy∥2
2
-0.025 Fig. 5: Estimation Loss and Terrain Level During Training
Orientation ∥gx∥2
2
+∥gy∥2
2
-1.25
Joint accelerations ∥θ¨∥2
2
−2.5×10−7 IV. RESULTS
Joint power |τ∥θ˙|T −2.5×10−5
∥v∥2+0.2∗∥ω∥2 In the experiments, we validate the efficiency and gen-
2 2
Body height w.r.t. feet (htarget −h)2 0.1 eralizability of the proposed humanoid locomotion on two
Feet clearance (cid:80) (cid:16) pt z arget −pi z (cid:17)2 ·v x i y -0.25 humanoid robots: Unitree H1 and Fourier GR-1 (Fig. 4), the
feet
Action rate ∥at −at−1∥2
2
-0.01 experiments emphasize:
F S To e m e r o q t o u s t e t h u s n m e b ss le 1 ∥a (cid:80) (cid:8) t ∃ − i, | (cid:12) (cid:12) 2 F a τi x i t− y | (cid:12) (cid:12) 1 2 > + 3 at (cid:12) (cid:12) − F 2 i z ∥ (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:9) 2 2 - - − 0 3 2 . . 0 0 . 1 5×10−6 • • E E f f f f e e c c t t i i v v e e n n e e s s s s o o f f Pe P r e c r e c p e t p io ti n ve in L e o st c i o m m a o ti t n io g n n : ex W t- e ste d p em sta o t n e - .
alljoints kpi 2 strate the proposed method successfully navigates ex-
Joint velocity (cid:80) θ˙ i|2 2 −1×10−4 treme terrains including stairs (≥ 0.15m), wooden
alljoints
Joint tracking error (cid:80) |θi −θ
i
target|2 -0.25 platforms (≥ 0.4m), slopes (15◦), and gaps.
alljoints • Effectiveness of the Perceptive Internal Model(PIM):
Arm joint deviation (cid:80) |θi −θ i default|2 -0.1 The terrain-based internal model accurately predicts the
armjoints
Hip joint deviation (cid:80) |θi −θ
i
default|2 -0.5 robot’s states, enhancing the stability and adaptability of
hipjoints the locomotion.
Waist joint deviation (cid:80) |θi −θ
i
default|2 -0.25
• Cross-Platform Validation: We validate the proposed
waistjoints
Joint pos limits (cid:80) outi -2.0 method on two different humanoid robots in challenging
alljoints environments, demonstrating its robustness in mastering
Joint vel limits (cid:80) RELU(θˆ i −θˆ i max) -0.1 disturbances and difficult terrains.
alljoints
Torque limits (cid:80) RELU(τˆi −τˆ
i
max) -0.1
alljoints A. PIM vs HIM
No fly 1{only one feet on ground} 0.25
F F e e e e t t l s a li t p eral distance |y (cid:80) l B eft(cid:12) (cid:12) fo v o i t t o − ot(cid:12) (cid:12) y ∗ r B ig ∼ htf 1 oo n t e | w − co d nt m act in 2 -0 .5 .25 her W e e the co d m if p fe a r r e e nc th e e is e t s h ti a m t P at I i M on u a se c s cu p r e a r c c y ep o ti f on PI f M or e a s n t d im H at I i M ng ,
feet
Feet ground parallel (cid:80) Var(Hi) -2.0 while HIM does not, both of their corresponding policies use
Feet contact force f f (cid:80) e e e e t t RELU(F i z −F th ) −2.5×10−4 p le e v r e c l ep i t n i d o i n ca f t o e r s lo th co e m d o if ti fi o c n u . lt A y s o s f ho t w er n ra i i n n F t i h g at 5, th w e he r r o e bo te t rr c a a in n
Feet parallel Var(D) -2.5 traverse and estimation loss is the error between estimated
Contact momentum (cid:80) |vz ∗Fz| −2.5×10−4
i i velocity and real velocity. PIM can achieve higher training
feet
efficiency and provide higher estimation accuracy, as well as
enable robots to traverse more difficult terrain.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Fig. 6: We conducted extensive hardware experiments to validate the effectiveness of the proposed method across different
humanoid robots. (a) H1 traverses stairs with heights of 15 cm. (b) H1 consecutively steps onto a wooden platform and
jumps over a gap between two platforms. (c) We successfully deploy the proposed policy on GR1 .
B. Stairs C. High platform & gap
Compared to stair climbing, jumping onto high platforms
and between gaps demands less perception accuracy but
requires the policy to respond more rapidly to changes in
We validate that the proposed method enables the robot
perception. As demonstrated in Fig. 6-b, H1 successfully
to successfully traverse stairs with a height of 15 cm (Fig.
performs consecutive jumps onto platforms and over gaps,
6-a), surpassing existing methods in the literature, such
which highlights the effectiveness of the proposed method in
as [6], [8], which achieve a maximum height of only 10 cm.
perceptive integrated state estimation and executing extreme
This demonstrates the enhanced capability of the proposed
parkour actions.
perceptive locomotion in handling more challenging terrains.
In addition, we would like to highlight the challenge posed
D. Cross-Platform Validation
by the foot length, which equals the stair width (30cm). This
constraint requires precise foot placement to avoid stepping In addition to H1, we applied the same training process
too far forward, which would cause the foot to get stuck of the proposed method to Fourier GR-1, unlike H1, whose
on the next step and prevent proper lifting, or stepping too ankle has only one tandem DOF, GR-1 has two DOF at
far back, which would result in a loss of balance and the the ankles powered by parallel joints. Our method can
robot falling. This highlights the critical need for accurate still enable it to traverse various terrains as demonstrated in
state prediction and perception, further demonstrating the Fig. 6-c. This highlights the method’s robustness to different
effectiveness of the proposed perceptive locomotion policy robot configurations, such as variations in height, mass, joint
in handling challenging environments with precise control. configuration, and foot design. These results suggest the

===== PAGE 7 =====
potential of the proposed method to be developed into a [10] Z. Zhuang, S. Yao, and H. Zhao, “Humanoid parkour learning,” arXiv
generalized solution for humanoid locomotion across diverse preprint arXiv:2406.10759, 2024.
[11] X. Cheng, Y. Ji, J. Chen, R. Yang, G. Yang, and X. Wang, “Ex-
platforms.
pressive whole-body control for humanoid robots,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.16796, 2024.
E. Whole-body Movement
[12] T. He, Z. Luo, W. Xiao, C. Zhang, K. Kitani, C. Liu, and G. Shi,
As a whole-body control method, we observed that the “Learning human-to-humanoid real-time whole-body teleoperation,”
robot performs coordinated upper-body movements to main- arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04436, 2024.
[13] P. Dugar, A. Shrestha, F. Yu, B. van Marum, and A. Fern, “Learning
tain balance without prior knowledge, particularly during
multi-modal whole-body control for real-world humanoid robots,”
extreme actions such as jumping. In general, the robot arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07295, 2024.
avoided walking with the same hand or foot during flat- [14] Z. Fu, Q. Zhao, Q. Wu, G. Wetzstein, and C. Finn, “Humanplus:
Humanoid shadowing and imitation from humans,” arXiv preprint
ground tests. During jumping motions, as demonstrated in the
arXiv:2406.10454, 2024.
fourth image of Fig. 6-b, the robot swings its left arm forward
[15] X. Gu, Y.-J. Wang, and J. Chen, “Humanoid-gym: Reinforcement
heavily as its right leg jumps, maintaining balance during learning for humanoid robot with zero-shot sim2real transfer,” arXiv
these extreme actions. This outcome indicates that with preprint arXiv:2404.05695, 2024.
[16] N. Hansen, J. SV, V. Sobal, Y. LeCun, X. Wang, and H. Su, “Hier-
appropriate reward design and model prediction as achieved
archical world models as visual whole-body humanoid controllers,”
by our method, the robot can generate simple, human-like arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18418, 2024.
movements without prior data or imitation learning. [17] Z. Jiang, Y. Xie, J. Li, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, and Y. Zhu, “Harmon:
Whole-body motion generation of humanoid robots from language
V. CONCLUSION descriptions,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning.
[18] J. Li, Y. Zhu, Y. Xie, Z. Jiang, M. Seo, G. Pavlakos, and Y. Zhu,
In this work, we propose an effective framework for
“Okami: Teaching humanoid robots manipulation skills through single
perceptive humanoid locomotion in complex terrain. The video imitation,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning.
framework includes Perceptive Internal Model(PIM) for [19] B. van Marum, A. Shrestha, H. Duan, P. Dugar, J. Dao, and A. Fern,
next-state prediction, which utilizes perceptive information in “Revisitingrewarddesignandevaluationforrobusthumanoidstanding
and walking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19173, 2024.
addition to HIM. We also present some novel techniques in
[20] C. Zhang, W. Xiao, T. He, and G. Shi, “Wococo: Learning whole-
humanoid locomotion including action curriculum, symmetry body humanoid control with sequential contacts,” arXiv preprint
regularization, and reward function design. We demonstrate arXiv:2406.06005, 2024.
[21] W. Zhao, Y. Zhao, J. Pajarinen, and M. Muehlebach, “Bi-level motion
success in sim-to-real deployment on different humanoid
imitation for humanoid robots,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot
robots with different heights, mass, joint configurations, and Learning.
foot designs. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the [22] T. He, Z. Luo, X. He, W. Xiao, C. Zhang, W. Zhang, K. Kitani,
first perceptive locomotion framework that works well across C. Liu, and G. Shi, “Omnih2o: Universal and dexterous human-
to-humanoid whole-body teleoperation and learning,” arXiv preprint
different robot platforms.
arXiv:2406.08858, 2024.
[23] X. Cheng, K. Shi, A. Agarwal, and D. Pathak, “Extreme parkour with
REFERENCES
legged robots,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
[1] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11443–11450.
V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills [24] A. Agarwal, A. Kumar, J. Malik, and D. Pathak, “Legged locomotion
for legged robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019. inchallengingterrainsusingegocentricvision,”inConferenceonrobot
[2] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 403–415.
“Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Science [25] D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, D. Sako, and M. Hutter, “Anymal parkour:
robotics, vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020. Learning agile navigation for quadrupedal robots,” Science Robotics,
[3] J. Long, Z. Wang, Q. Li, L. Cao, J. Gao, and J. Pang, “Hybrid vol. 9, no. 88, p. eadi7566, 2024.
internal model: Learning agile legged locomotion with simulated [26] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter,
robot response,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning “Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the
Representations, 2024. wild,” Science robotics, vol. 7, no. 62, p. eabk2822, 2022.
[4] J. Long, W. Yu, Q. Li, Z. Wang, D. Lin, and J. Pang, “Learning
[27] T. Miki, L. Wellhausen, R. Grandia, F. Jenelten, T. Homberger,
h-infinity locomotion control,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot
and M. Hutter, “Elevation mapping for locomotion and navigation
Learning, 2024.
using gpu,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
[5] G. B. Margolis and P. Agrawal, “Walk these ways: Tuning robot
Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2022, pp. 2273–2280.
control for generalization with multiplicity of behavior,” in Conference
[28] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 22–31.
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint
[6] X. Gu, Y.-J. Wang, X. Zhu, C. Shi, Y. Guo, Y. Liu, and J. Chen, “Ad-
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
vancing humanoid locomotion: Mastering challenging terrains with
[29] M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, P. Goyal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin,
denoising world model learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14472,
“Unsupervisedlearningofvisualfeaturesbycontrastingclusterassign-
2024.
ments,” Advances in neural information processing systems, 2020.
[7] I. Radosavovic, B. Zhang, B. Shi, J. Rajasegaran, S. Kamat, T. Darrell,
K. Sreenath, and J. Malik, “Humanoid locomotion as next token [30] W. Xu and F. Zhang, “Fast-lio: A fast, robust lidar-inertial odometry
prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19469, 2024. package by tightly-coupled iterated kalman filter,” IEEE Robotics and
[8] Q. Liao, B. Zhang, X. Huang, X. Huang, Z. Li, and K. Sreenath, Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3317–3324, 2021.
“Berkeley humanoid: A research platform for learning-based control,” [31] W.Xu,Y.Cai,D.He,J.Lin,andF.Zhang,“Fast-lio2:Fastdirectlidar-
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21781, 2024. inertial odometry,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 38, no. 4, pp.
[9] W. Cui, S. Li, H. Huang, B. Qin, T. Zhang, L. Zheng, Z. Tang, 2053–2073, 2022.
C. Hu, N. Yan, J. Chen et al., “Adapting humanoid locomotion over [32] Z. Su, X. Huang, D. Ordon˜ez-Apraez, Y. Li, Z. Li, Q. Liao, G. Turrisi,
challenging terrain via two-phase training,” in 8th Annual Conference M. Pontil, C. Semini, Y. Wu et al., “Leveraging symmetry in rl-based
on Robot Learning. legged locomotion control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17320, 2024.