===== PAGE 1 =====
No More Blind Spots: Learning Vision-Based Omnidirectional Bipedal
Locomotion for Challenging Terrain
Mohitvishnu S. Gadde, Pranay Dugar, Ashish Malik, Alan Fern
Abstract—Effective bipedal locomotion in dynamic environ-
ments, such as cluttered indoor spaces or uneven terrain,
requires agile and adaptive movement in all directions. This
necessitates omnidirectional terrain sensing and a controller
capable of processing such input. We present a learning frame-
work for vision-based omnidirectional bipedal locomotion, en-
abling seamless movement using depth images. A key challenge
is the high computational cost of rendering omnidirectional
depth images in simulation, making traditional sim-to-real
reinforcement learning (RL) impractical. Our method combines
a robust blind controller with a teacher policy that supervises a
vision-based student policy, trained on noise-augmented terrain
data to avoid rendering costs during RL and ensure robustness.
We also introduce a data augmentation technique for supervised
student training, accelerating training by up to 10 times
compared to conventional methods. Our framework is vali-
dated through simulation and real-world tests, demonstrating
effective omnidirectional locomotion with minimal reliance on
expensive rendering. This is, to the best of our knowledge,
the first demonstration of vision-based omnidirectional bipedal
locomotion, showcasing its adaptability to diverse terrains.
I. INTRODUCTION
Legged locomotion has recently been a central objective of
Fig. 1: The omni-direction robot locomotion controller is
the robotics research community due to the capability of such
trained in simulation via student-teacher learning to proac-
robots to traverse across natural and unstructured terrains [1],
tively adjust the gait to challenging terrain conditions based
[2], [3], [4]. Over the past decade, learning-based approaches,
on the input from 4 depth cameras. This controller is then
particularly blind locomotion controllers, have demonstrated
transferred to the real robot.
remarkable progress in enabling stable walking and running
across a variety of environments [5], [6]. These blind policies Training end-to-end vision-based locomotion controllers is
capitalize on proprioceptive feedback to maintain balance notoriously challenging, particularly when using reinforce-
and momentum, forming a strong foundation for real-world ment learning (RL), due to the high computational cost of
deployment [7]. However, despite their robustness on well- simulating realistic visual inputs. Rendering depth or RGB
modeled or homogeneous surfaces, blind controllers often images for complex environments is expensive [12], which
struggle in the face of unforeseen obstacles or complex, slows training and limits throughput. These difficulties are
uneven terrains. amplified in the omnidirectional setting, where the volume
To address these limitations, recent research has focused of visual data increases by at least a factor of four, placing
on vision-based locomotion controllers [8], [9], where exte- even greater demands on simulation and processing. In
roceptive sensors such as cameras or depth sensors provide addition to rendering cost, sim-to-real transfer introduces
crucial information about the environment. By analyzing further complexity: policies must be robust to real-world
visual inputs, these controllers adapt to the changes in noise, actuator delays, and the absence of privileged infor-
terrain and proactively adjust foot placements [10], thereby mation often used during training. While most prior work on
improving stability and efficiency. Although such vision- vision-based bipedal locomotion has focused on forward [13]
based methods enable new possibilities for agile and adaptive or constrained directional movement to simplify perception
movement, they also introduce challenges in perception, sim- and control, practical applications demand omnidirectional
to-real transfer, and high-dimensional policy learning [11]. agility, posing a significant challenge for scalable training
and deployment of vision-based policies [14].
*This work is supported by NSF Award 2321851, DARPA contract To address these challenges, we propose a novel frame-
HR0011-24-9-0423, and the NVIDIA Academic Grant Program. work for vision-based omnidirectional bipedal locomotion
All authors are associated with Collaborative Robotics and Intelligent
that balances computational efficiency with robust real-
Systems Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331.
{gaddem, dugarp, malikas, alan.fern}@oregonstate.edu world performance. The framework is explicitly designed
6202
raM
61
]OR.sc[
2v92911.8052:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
to minimize reliance on computationally expensive depth foot placements. This limitation often results in suboptimal
rendering during training. It achieves this through three key locomotion performance and requires excessive corrective
strategies. First, we initialize training with a stable, pre- inputs to traverse such environments to avoid failures. Vision-
trained blind locomotion policy that provides basic balance based locomotion has been explored as a means to provide
and movement capabilities, serving as a reliable backbone exteroceptive sensing to address these challenges, allowing
for the vision-based controller. Second, we employ a student- these legged robots to perceive and interpret the terrain
teacher distillation approach enhanced with DAGGER [15], features and traverse varying terrain. .
where a privileged teacher policy is trained via simulation-
B. Vision-Based Legged Locomotion
intensive reinforcement learning using low-cost height maps
and environment state information. The vision-based student Vision-based locomotion has been extensively researched
then learns from this teacher through supervised imitation, for quadrupedal robots [17], [1], [3], [4] and, to a lesser
using rendered depth images only for the student policy. extent, for bipedal robots [13], [14]. These methods typically
Third, we introduce a data augmentation technique during use RL to train and demonstrate sim-to-real transfer of
student training that significantly increases the effective these vision-based locomotion controllers. Elevation maps
training set without additional rendering. Together, these or height scans in the global frame of reference have been
components enable efficient training of vision-aware omnidi- used as the observed perceptive input to train the RL policy.
rectional policies within practical time and resource budgets. For example, bipedal robots[13] and quadrupedal robots[18],
Our experimental results demonstrate that our proposed [19], [20], [21] utilize these height map scans around each
framework leads to significantly faster training than con- foot. While several other approaches [18], [19] employ a
ventional approaches while maintaining competitive per- uniformly structured elevation map that is centered at the
formance in both simulation and real-world scenarios. In robot frame. By assuming the availability of height maps at
summary, the key contributions of this work are as follows: test time, simulation-based training is able to avoid expensive
rendering of image and depth data, making training via RL
• We present, to the best of our knowledge, the first
practical. However, this assumption requires careful sensor
framework for robust, vision-guided omnidirectional
calibration and robust height map estimation to maintain con-
bipedal locomotion.
sistency between the simulated experience and real-world.
• We propose an instantiation of student-teacher training
In contrast, we are interested in a solution that does not
specifically targeted at reducing the impractical over-
require careful calibration for global odometry or direct
head of directly training with depth rendering in the
estimation of local elevation maps. This is motivated by
reinforcement-learning loop.
the additional complexity of such calibration and estimation
• We propose an innovative data augmentation strategy
in the omnidirectional setting, where multiple cameras are
during student training, where duplicating data buffers
typically involved (4 in our experiments). Prior work has con-
and varying velocity commands enhances dataset di-
sidered learning quadruped locomotion policies that directly
versity at a minimal additional computational cost.
use vision input from cameras, including depth images [20],
This approach reduces rendering overhead and short-
[21] and RGB images [22]. This type of end-to-end training
ens overall training time, while improving the policy’s
is often carried out via teacher-student approaches [23], [17],
generalization to real-world scenarios.
[1], [3], [4], where the teacher model benefits from the priv-
II. RELATED WORK ileged information in the simulation to enhance policy learn-
ing. These methods have demonstrated success in deploying
A. Reinforcement Learning (RL) for Bipedal Robots
these RL-trained policies on quadrupedal robots in real-world
In recent years, RL-based controllers have been exten- scenarios. However, they have yet to be demonstrated on
sively researched for legged locomotion [7], [16], [5]. These the more difficult problem of bipedal locomotion. Our work
controllers are usually trained in simulation using model-free expands on these end-to-end student-teacher approaches to
RL approaches, which leverage the robot’s proprioception, make them practical for the more computationally intensive
enabling legged robots to traverse various terrains without training of bipedal locomotion.
taking any explicit gait input to achieve locomotion. How-
ever, despite the advances, these blind locomotion policies III. TRAINING AN OMNIDIRECTIONAL TERRAIN-AWARE
primarily rely upon the proprioceptive feedback from the
LOCOMOTION POLICY
robot to learn a policy that is able to achieve stability We formulate the omnidirectional terrain-aware locomo-
and maintain balance during locomotion in the presence tion problem as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), defined
of moderate disturbances. This allows for locomotion on by the tuple M = (S,A,T,r,γ), where the state space
well-structured surfaces with limited amounts of ground and S consists of the robot’s proprioceptive and exteroceptive
external disturbances. observations, including joint positions, velocities, base orien-
Unfortunately, blind RL-based locomotion controllers tation, linear and angular velocities, and terrain-related sen-
struggle with unknown obstacles and significant terrain vari- sory inputs such as height maps or depth inputs. The action
ations as they cannot sense or anticipate the changes in space A represents low-level motor control commands. T
the environment they are operating under before making represents the system transition function. The agent receives

===== PAGE 3 =====
Fig. 2: Hierarchical network architecture for proposed vision-based omnidirectional locomotion control. (A) The policy
consists of a frozen pretrained blind policy that outputs a base action, and a trainable modulator conditioned on perception
to produce a modulating action. The final action is the sum of both outputs. (B) The teacher model uses privileged height map
encoded by an MLP. (C) The student model uses egocentric multi-view images processed by a ResNet-18-based encoder.
a reward r(s ,a ) at each time step to encourage stable to avoid rendering during teacher training. In particular, the
t t
and efficient locomotion, with reward terms designed to teacher has access to easily available height map, which
promote following commanded velocity, minimizing energy requires minimal computational overhead. It is only during
consumption, maintaining balance, and successfully travers- student training that depth map rendering is included in
ing terrains. The objective is to learn a policy π(a |s ) the simulation loop. Our approach additionally enhances the
t t
that maximizes the expected cumulative reward J(π) = student-teacher framework in two ways to further improve
(cid:104) (cid:105)
E (cid:80)T γtr(s ,a ) , where γ is the discount factor bal- the cost of training. First, we use a hierarchical policy archi-
t=0 t t
tecture that leverages a pre-trained blind policy for both the
ancing immediate and future rewards.
student and teacher. Second, we develop a data augmentation
A. Approach Overview approach during student training that effectively multiplies
the amount of training data without additional rendering or
Training bipedal locomotion controllers via RL requires
simulations. Below, we describe the details of the policy
extensive simulation experience. While this has been prac-
architecture and the student-teacher training approach.
tical for blind locomotion, the computational cost of simu-
lation becomes impractical when visual rendering must be B. Policy Architectures
done in the RL loop. Thus, our approach is designed to The student and teacher policies share a nearly identical
minimize the amount of rendering done in simulation during neural network architecture, differing only in the input blocks
training. In particular, we enhance the popular student- used for visual perception. Below, we first describe the
teacher framework that has been used successfully in prior observation space and the shared policy architecture, which
robotics work, including quadruped locomotion [23], [17], assumes a generic visual input encoding. We then detail the
[1], [3], [4], [24], manipulation [25], [26], [27], [28], and specific vision encoders used by the teacher and student,
self-driving [29], [30], [31]. corresponding to privileged height maps and egocentric depth
The general student-teacher approach first trains a teacher maps, respectively.
policy via simulation-intensive RL using privileged informa- 1) Observation and Action Spaces: Both student and
tion, which is typically intended to decrease the difficulty teacher policies are trained to operate using a combination
of learning. Next, a student policy is trained to mimic of the robot’s proprioceptive state, perceptual representation
the teacher policy without using privileged information, but of surrounding terrain, and user-specified control commands,
rather input information that will be available at test time. which are described as follows:
Importantly, student training is fundamentally a supervised • Robot proprioceptive state: This includes the position
learning problem, which avoids the simulation-intensive ex- and velocity of all the measurable actuated and un-
ploratory learning process of RL. actuated joints, along with the orientation (in quater-
In this work, we instantiate the student-teacher framework nion) and angular velocity of the floating base.

===== PAGE 4 =====
• Perceptive input: This includes information about the ings are concatenated and passed through a final single-
local terrain around the robot. The teacher policy uses layer MLP to get a single 128-dimensional perceptual
a privileged height map centered at the robot, while embedding.
the student policy receives egocentric depth images • Differential Action Network: The encoded
captured in real time from four cameras covering rect- proprioceptive-command vector, the perceptual
angular regions around the robot. embedding, and the action output from the blind
• User control commands: These define the robot’s target locomotion controller are concatenated to form
motion and consist of desired linear velocities in the X a unified feature representation. This combined
and Y directions, and angular velocity about the yaw representation is passed through a two-layer LSTM
axis. network, each layer consisting of 128 hidden units.
The LSTM captures temporal dependencies across
The action space for both teacher and student policies are
observation sequences and enables the policy to adapt
the PD position setpoints for all 10 actuators (5 per leg).
its behavior based on both proprioceptive and visual
These setpoints are produced by our policy at 50Hz and
feedback over time. The output of the LSTM is a
processed by low-level PD controllers running at 2 kHz.
differential action vector with the same dimensionality
This setup ensures smooth, responsive execution of the high-
as the action space.
level actions produced by the network, enabling stable and
adaptive locomotion across diverse terrains. • Action Output: The final action is computed by adding
the differential action to the baseline action from the
2) Network Architecture: Both policies follow a hybrid
blind locomotion controller.
neural network architecture that combines the action pro-
duced by a pre-trained blind locomotion controller with a C. Privileged Teacher Training
differential action computed by a network that depends on
The teacher policy is trained using the Proximal Policy
the perceptual input. This choice of architecture enables
Optimization (PPO) actor-critic RL algorithm [32] in a Mu-
both policies to leverage stable low-level locomotion skills
JoCo simulation environment [33], where the robot aims to
while adapting to complex terrains through visual feedback.
follow randomized commands over diverse and randomized
Intuitively, on moderate terrain the differential action can be
terrains. The training is conducted using 120 cores on a
nearly zero, since the blind policy is already effective, and
dual Intel Xeon Platinum 8280 server on the Intel vLab
need only adjust the blind policy action as necessary based
Cluster. Below, we describe our training environment and the
on the visual terrain input. The policy architecture is shown
training episode generation, followed by our choice of reward
in Figure 2 and includes the following components.
function, and finally details of our PPO implementation.
• Pre-Trained Blind Locomotion Controller: The blind
locomotion policy is adapted from [16], which is a 2-
layered LSTM network with 64 hidden units designed to
learn robust locomotion using proprioceptive feedback.
This policy is trained on relatively flat terrain to follow
linear and angular velocity commands. . To enhance sta-
bility and robustness, the training process incorporates
external perturbations, allowing the robot to maintain
stability and recover from disturbances during locomo-
tion. This policy is pre-trained and remains frozen in
our architecture during omnidirectional training.
• Proprioceptive and Command Encoder: The robot’s
joint positions and velocities, floating base states, and
user-specified control commands are encoded using a
Fig. 3: Various types of terrains used in training
64-dimensional linear layer into a latent feature vector.
• Teacher Vision Encoder: The teacher policy processes Training Episode Generation. Each training episode takes
the four concatenated privileged height maps via a two- place on a randomly generated 30m × 30m terrain map,
layer MLP with [256, 128] units per layer and ReLU drawn from one of five terrain types illustrated in Figure 3:
activation functions resulting in a 128-dimensional per- (1) Flat – featureless terrain, (2) Hills – smoothly varying
ceptual embedding. height maps, (3) Blocks – randomly placed blocks of varying
• Student Vision Encoder: The student policy’s vision dimensions, (4) Ridges – sequential ridges with varying
encoder is depicted in Figure 2-(C) . It first uses a width and height, and (5) Stairs – upward and downward
shared parameter ResNet-18 convolutional network to stairs with varying step sizes. These terrain types are sampled
independently encode each depth images captured from with probabilities [0.03, 0.07, 0.35, 0.20, 0.35], respectively.
the four cameras. The encodings of each image are Randomization parameters are detailed in Table I, with care
then projected into a 128-dimensional encoding using taken to avoid feature overlap.
individual single-layer MLPs. Finally, all four encod- A small portion of episodes use flat and hilly terrains

===== PAGE 5 =====
TABLE I: Ranges for terrain randomization used in training
• Foot Collision Penalty (R feet ): This term penalizes un-
and evaluation. All terrains are uniformly sampled within the
wanted collisions between the front tip of the foot and
specified range.
the terrain during swing. A penalty of −5 is applied
for each such contact, which helps the policy learn to
Terrain Parameter Train Range Easy Eval Hard Eval
Ridge Height [m] [0.05, 0.6] [0.05, 0.5] [0.5, 0.6] lift the feet cleanly. Without this term, agents tend to
Height [m] [0.05, 0.2] [0.05, 0.2] [0.2, 0.3] stumble, harming sim-to-real transfer. In simulation, we
Stair Length [m] [0.25, 0.4] [0.4, 0.4] [0.25, 0.4] detect these events using contact sensors at the front of
Steps [4, 28] [4, 12] [12, 28] each foot. These sensors are used only during training
Len./Width [m] [0.4, 1.0] [1.0, 1.0] [0.4, 1.0]
Block for reward computation and are not required at test time.
Height [m] [0.05, 0.4] [0.05, 0.3] [0.3, 0.5]
• Conrod Contact Penalty (R con ): To avoid unsafe leg
to stabilize training, while the majority focus on blocks, configurations, especially during sideways or backward
ridges, and stairs, which require more complex integration locomotion. This term penalizes contact between the
of visual and proprioceptive feedback. We observe that robot’s conrods and the terrain. It helps the policy learn
terrain diversity is more effective than reward tuning for to maintain safe leg posture and avoid dragging or
encouraging robust, non-aggressive behaviors. For instance, scraping parts that could cause instability or physical
omitting easier terrains leads to overly aggressive gaits, damage.
while incorporating realistic variations in stair step length or PPO Modifications. To improve training stability, we in-
ridge height encourages more natural step regulation through troduce two modifications to the standard PPO algorithm.
perception. First, we modify the PPO loss to include a mirror loss
The height map provided to the robot at each time step is over robot proprioceptive inputs as well as visual inputs.
a 3m × 2m area centered on the robot. The map is rendered This loss encourages the policy to choose symmetric actions
at 5cm resolution and encodes ground height relative to the when facing terrain that is symmetrically mirrored about
robot’s floating base. This relative encoding supports terrain the sagittal plane. Second, since our reward function uses
perception without requiring global localization or odometry, privileged information, we enhance the critic network by
which are often unreliable in real-world settings. providing it with additional privileged inputs beyond those
At the start of each episode, the robot is placed randomly available to the actor policy. These include the robot’s height
near the center of the terrain in a standing pose, facing and foot positions in the global frame, a square 0.5m height
a random direction. It is then given a randomly sampled map around each foot, and multiple rangefinder sensors on
velocity command, drawn from the set: step-in-place, step- both legs, two in front of each foot, two on the sides, two at
in-place-turn, walk, and walk-turn, with probabilities [0.05, the rear, and two on the conrods. These range measurements
0.05, 0.60, 0.30]. A corresponding height command is also are used only by the critic to enhance terrain understanding
provided. Velocity commands are sampled uniformly from around contact regions. These additional inputs improve the
the following ranges: X velocity ∈ [−0.6,1.0]m/s, Y ve- critic’s ability to predict long-term reward, particularly for
locity ∈ [−0.45,0.45]m/s, yaw rate ∈ [−22.5,22.5]deg/s, complex terrain interactions that are not fully observable
and base height ∈ [0.4,0.95]m. To promote adaptation, the from proprioception or height maps alone.
command is randomly modified once during the episode at
D. Student Training
a timestep between 200 and 250.
Each episode runs for up to 450 timesteps (9 seconds The training process for the student policy largely mir-
simulated). Early termination occurs if any of the following rors that of the teacher policy, including terrain generation,
conditions are met: (1) The floating base roll or pitch exceeds sampling of velocity and height commands, and episode
15 degrees, (2) The robot’s linear velocity norm exceeds termination conditions. However, unlike the teacher, which is
1 plus the commanded velocity, (3) The base height drops trained via RL, the student policy is trained through policy
below 40cm relative to terrain, and (4) The robot’s body distillation. Specifically, we follow the DAGGER training
(excluding conrods and feet) collides with the terrain. strategy [15], where each episode is generated by using
Reward Function. Our reward function is designed to the student (initially random) to select actions with the
promote smooth, stable, and transferable bipedal locomotion privileged teacher being applied at each step to generate
over complex terrain. It encourages clean contact transitions, supervisory training data. The student is trained via random
discourages unsafe configurations, and supports robust gait mini-batches collected across the episodes to mimic the
formation. The total reward is the sum of three equally teacher’s actions and perceptual encodings. In particular,
weighted components: the student’s loss function includes two terms: 1) the mean
squared error (MSE) between the teacher and student action,
R = R + R + R
0 feet con and 2) the MSE between the teacher’s perceptual encoding
• Base Locomotion Reward (R 0 ): Adapted from [16], and the student’s encoding. We found that the second term
this reward stabilizes a consistent alternating gait and helps accelerate learning by directly supervising the ResNet
forms the foundation of both the blind controller and the image encoder to produce a representation that the teacher
vision-based policy. It promotes agreement with target discovered during privileged training.
commands, balance, and regular stepping. Note that since the student requires depth renderings for

===== PAGE 6 =====
TABLE II: Parameters and ranges used in domain random-
where torque saturation of the knee motor can otherwise limit
ization. All values are uniformly sampled within the range.
performance. Actuation delays are also introduced by ran-
domly delaying torque commands by up to 3 milliseconds.
Parameter Range Unit
Mass [-0.25, 0.25] % Visual input perturbations are introduced to prevent the
COM Location [-0.01, 0.01] m policy from overfitting to simulation-generated terrain rep-
Spring Stiffness [-500, 500] Nm/rad resentations. The height map is spatially shifted per episode
Sim Model
Torque Efficiency [0.9, 1.0] % and at every policy step to simulate temporal noise, and a
Torque Delay [0.5, 3] ms randomized delay of up to 100 milliseconds is applied to
Encoder Noise [-0.05, 0.05] rad
simulate perception latency. These perturbations are critical
XY Shift / (episode,step) [-0.05, 0.05] m
for preparing the teacher policy to operate under imperfect
Z Shift / episode [-0.1, 0.1] m
Height Map and noisy conditions that the student will encounter.
Z Shift / step [-0.02, 0.02] m
Delay [20, 100] ms IV. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
its input, generating these trajectories is computationally ex- A. Policy Performance
pensive compared to teacher training. To make more efficient We evaluate the performance of the state-of-the-art blind
use of this data and improve generalization, we introduce a bipedal locomotion controller, SaW [16], alongside three
targeted data augmentation strategy. Rather than collecting policies trained using our proposed approach: (1) a blind
more simulation episodes, we generate additional supervision policy trained from scratch on the same terrain distribution
signals by duplicating existing state trajectories and varying described in the previous sections, (2) the proposed full
the velocity commands given to the teacher at each time step. privileged teacher policy, and (3) the distilled student policy
Thus, a single rendered depth image at a timestep results in that operates with egocentric depth inputs.
multiple training examples. This imputation technique simu- To understand the contribution of each policy component,
lates how the teacher would respond to different locomotion we conduct an ablation study in which each terrain is eval-
intents in the same terrain context. uated under two difficulty levels: easy and hard, as defined
Concretely, for each training trajectory buffer, we sample in Table I. For each policy and terrain mode, we collect 100
random values within bounded ranges for X velocity, Y episodes and compute four key evaluation metrics: Success
velocity, and yaw rate, drawn from: X velocity: [-0.6, 1.0] Rate, Episodes with Foot Collisions, Terminations due to
m/s, Y velocity: [-0.6, 0.6] m/s, and Turn rate: [-0.4, 0.4] Foot Collisions, and Energy Consumption, as shown in Fig.
rad/s. These new command values are injected into both 4. Note that for space constraint reasons, results for “easy”
the student and teacher input states at the corresponding are aggregated across the three terrain type, while the “hard”
command indices. The teacher and student policies are then category is broken down by terrain.
evaluated on these modified inputs. The student is trained to In terms of Success Rate, the Privileged Teacher consis-
minimize the KL divergence between the resulting actions tently outperforms all baselines across terrains, achieving
under these perturbed commands. This process is repeated over 85% success even on the most difficult terrains. The
over several epochs (e.g., 10 per batch), increasing training vast majority of failures occur during episodes that require
diversity without additional simulation steps. high sideways or backward stepping. The robot morphology,
To further improve robustness to sensor noise and real- particularly the conrods, makes such high steps extremely
world imperfections, we apply standard vision augmentations difficult. It is unclear how close the Teacher’s performance
to the student’s input depth images. These include Gaussian is to the maximum achievable on this terrain distribution
noise injection, dropout artifacts, and random image jittering; given the robot morphology. The nonprivileged vision-based
simulating the variability and degradation seen in real camera student policy closely matches the teacher’s performance,
data. Together, these modifications ensure that the student notably outperforming both blind variants, especially on
policy faithfully transfers the terrain-adaptive locomotion stair-hard and block-hard terrains. The blind policy without
strategy learned by the teacher to a real-world deployable terrain labels struggles, particularly on complex terrains.
form, relying solely on realistic depth-based perception with- Figure 4 also shows that the teacher and student both
out access to privileged simulation data. have many fewer foot collisions during an episode compared
to the blind policies. Both blind policies, especially the
E. Domain Randomization
baseline without terrain information, experience frequent
To ensure robust sim-to-real transfer and to increase train- foot collisions, reflecting a lack of terrain anticipation and
ing data diversity, we apply extensive domain randomization proactive control. We see the same trend for the percent of
across model parameters, actuation characteristics, sensor episodes that terminate due to collisions, where the blind
inputs, and actuation delays. A summary of the randomized policy exhibits the highest failure rates (up to 60% on
parameters is shown in Table II. block-hard), while both the teacher and student policies
Model parameters such as mass and link inertia are ran- demonstrate substantial robustness, maintaining termination
domized per episode to simulate variability across different rates below 20% on all terrains.
robots. Randomizing torque efficiency is particularly impact- In terms of energy consumption, measured in kilojoules,
ful for transfer to extreme terrains (e.g., stepping up 0.5m), the blind policy, trained over a distribution of terrains without

===== PAGE 7 =====
Fig. 4: Bar plots comparing four policy variants: Blind Policy, Blind Policy + Terrain, Privileged Teacher, and Ours (Student)
across four terrain types (easy, ridge-hard, stair-hard, block-hard). The plots show (1) Success Rate, defined as completing
10-second rollouts without falling; (2) Episodes with Collision, which count any episode with foot or conrod collision events;
(3) Terminations due to Foot Collision, measured by checking if foot or conrod collisions occurred in the final 100 steps of
terminated episodes; and (4) Energy Consumption, reported as average cumulative joint effort in kilojoules. All metrics are
averaged over 100 episodes for each variant of terrain with 95% confidence intervals.
explicit terrain input, shows the highest energy cost across converges in just 20 hours using 110 million samples. In
all terrains, peaking at over 35 kJ. This is due to the contrast, removing both components results in significantly
policy adapting to the terrain distribution by converging to a slower training, requiring 144 hours and 900 million samples
conservative gait strategy characterized by high step heights on average across 5 random seeds. To further isolate the
and exaggerated motions, which anticipates unseen obstacles utility of the proposed augmentation, we include another
and results in inefficient and energetically costly locomotion. configuration where the student is trained using the blind
Both the student and privileged policies achieve significantly policy but with perceptual augmentation. In this case, we
lower energy use, indicating smoother and more efficient observe that the convergence slows down to 96 hours,
motions. This is a clear example of how visual information requiring about 600 million samples to train. This confirms
can translate to improved efficiency of a robotic system. the importance of augmenting experience buffers and initial-
izing from a pretrained controller to reduce training time,
B. Training Time Ablations simulation overhead, and rendering cost.
To evaluate the proposed training framework, we compare
V. HARDWARE DEPLOYMENT
training durations of the student and teacher across multiple
We deployed our proposed system on the bipedal robot
training configurations. Table III shows these comparisons,
Cassie, equipped with four Intel RealSense D455 cameras
highlighting the impact of using a pretrained blind policy and
positioned to provide 360◦ terrain coverage. For onboard
visual augmentation for both teacher and student training.
perception, we integrated an NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano
TABLE III: Comparison of training setups with and without
module dedicated to processing visual inputs. The cameras
blind policy.
are mounted on custom fixtures and calibrated by aligning
Training Phase With Blind Policy Without Blind Policy depth images to simulated ones under identical robot poses.
Teacher Training 152 hours (1.3 Billion) 216 hours (2.0 Billion) Each camera streams depth images at 90 FPS. These are
Student Training 20 hours (110 Million) 144hours(900Million) post-processed using hole-filling and distance clipping filters
Student Training 96 hours (600 Million) – before being passed to the ResNet-based vision encoder
(No Augmentation)
running on the Jetson. This module generates a compact
For the teacher policy, which utilizes 120 parallel work- vision embedding at 90 Hz, capturing egocentric terrain
ers, initializing with the pretrained blind policy leads to information around the robot in real time.
substantially faster convergence, completing in 152 hours The resulting vision embedding is transmitted asyn-
with 1.3 billion samples, compared to 216 hours and 2.0 chronously to the robot’s main computer, an Intel NUC,
billion samples without it. These training durations are which performs the forward pass of the remainder of the pol-
averaged over 10 independent runs with different random icy network. The policy uses the received vision embedding,
seeds. The results demonstrate that the blind policy serves proprioceptive input, and control commands to compute the
as a strong prior for exploration, improving sample efficiency final motor actions. These actions are then sent to the low-
and accelerating convergence. level controller for execution.
The benefits are even more pronounced during student The end-to-end latency between the vision pipeline and
training. When leveraging both the blind policy and our policy inference, including depth streaming, embedding com-
proposed data augmentation strategy, the student policy putation, and UDP transmission, is measured to be under 20

===== PAGE 8 =====
milliseconds. To evaluate performance in real-world scenar- [12] A. Loquercio, A. Kumar, and J. Malik, “Learning visual locomo-
ios, we constructed a test environment using modular wooden tion with cross-modal supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03785,
2022.
blocks of varying heights and sizes, closely mimicking the
[13] H. Duan, B. Pandit, M. S. Gadde, B. Van Marum, J. Dao,
terrain distributions seen during simulation training (Fig. 1) C. Kim, and A. Fern, “Learning Vision-Based Bipedal Locomotion
We tested the proposed system on the Cassie bipedal for Challenging Terrain,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May 2024, pp. 56–62.
robot across a variety of structured terrains, including single
[14] F. Chen, R. Wan, P. Liu, N. Zheng, and B. Zhou, “VMTS: Vision-
high blocks, stairs, and randomized block configurations with Assisted Teacher-Student Reinforcement Learning for Multi-Terrain
varying dimensions. The system successfully enabled Cassie Locomotion in Bipedal Robots,” Mar. 2025, arXiv:2503.07049 [cs]
version: 1.
to traverse these terrains in forward, sideways, and reverse
[15] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning
directions. In the forward direction, the robot was able to and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings
step up onto blocks as high as 0.5 meters. Due to the robot’s of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and
statistics, 2011, pp. 627–635.
morphological constraints, particularly the limited range of
[16] B. van Marum, A. Shrestha, H. Duan, P. Dugar, J. Dao, and A. Fern,
motion and joint configuration. The maximum traversable “Revisitingrewarddesignandevaluationforrobusthumanoidstanding
height was reduced to 0.35 meters for sideways motion and walking,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11256–11263.
and 0.2 meters in the reverse direction. Please refer to the
[17] W. Yu, D. Jain, A. Escontrela, A. Iscen, P. Xu, E. Coumans, S. Ha,
supplementary video for additional real-world deployment J. Tan, and T. Zhang, “Visual-Locomotion: Learning to Walk on
demonstrations. Complex Terrains with Vision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07022,
2021.
VI. SUMMARY
[18] P. Fankhauser, “Perceptive Locomotion for Legged Robots in
Rough Terrain,” Doctoral Thesis, ETH Zurich, 2018, accepted:
This work introduces a learning framework for vision-
2018-08-24T07:58:52Z.
based omnidirectional bipedal locomotion that addresses key [19] G. B. Margolis, T. Chen, K. Paigwar, X. Fu, D. Kim, S. Kim,
challenges in sim-to-real transfer and the high cost of visual and P. Agrawal, “Learning to Jump from Pixels,” Oct. 2021,
arXiv:2110.15344 [cs].
rendering for reinforcement learning. The method combines
[20] D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, C. Choy, A. Anandkumar, and M. Hutter,
a robust blind controller, a teacher-student distillation ap- “Neural Scene Representation for Locomotion on Structured Terrain,”
proach, and a novel data augmentation strategy to enable Jun. 2022, arXiv:2206.08077 [cs].
[21] T. Miki, L. Wellhausen, R. Grandia, F. Jenelten, T. Homberger, and
scalable and efficient training. We validated the framework in
M. Hutter, “Elevation Mapping for Locomotion and Navigation using
both simulation and real-world settings, demonstrating robust GPU,” Apr. 2022, arXiv:2204.12876 [cs].
locomotion across diverse terrains. [22] A. Loquercio, A. Kumar, and J. Malik, “Learning visual locomo-
tion with cross-modal supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03785,
2022.
REFERENCES
[23] H. Wang, H. Luo, W. Zhang, and H. Chen, “CTS: Concurrent
Teacher-Student Reinforcement Learning for Legged Locomotion,”
[1] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter,
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 9191–9198,
“Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in
Nov. 2024.
the wild,” Science Robotics, vol. 7, no. 62, p. eabk2822, Jan. 2022,
[24] C. Zhang, J. Jin, J. Frey, N. Rudin, M. Mattamala, C. Cadena,
publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
and M. Hutter, “Resilient Legged Local Navigation: Learning to
[2] Z. Zhuang, S. Yao, and H. Zhao, “Humanoid Parkour Learning,” Sep.
Traverse with Compromised Perception End-to-End,” in 2024 IEEE
2024, arXiv:2406.10759 [cs].
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May
[3] X. Cheng, K. Shi, A. Agarwal, and D. Pathak, “Extreme Parkour
2024, pp. 34–41.
with Legged Robots,” Sep. 2023, arXiv:2309.14341 [cs].
[25] J. Yamada, M. Rigter, J. Collins, and I. Posner, “TWIST: Teacher-
[4] A. Agarwal, A. Kumar, J. Malik, and D. Pathak, “Legged Locomotion
Student World Model Distillation for Efficient Sim-to-Real Transfer,”
in Challenging Terrains using Egocentric Vision,” in Proceedings of
Nov. 2023, arXiv:2311.03622 [cs].
The 6th Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, Mar. 2023, pp.
[26] E. S. Hu, J. Springer, O. Rybkin, and D. Jayaraman, “Privileged
403–415, iSSN: 2640-3498.
Sensing Scaffolds Reinforcement Learning,” in Proceedings of the
[5] I. Radosavovic, S. Kamat, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Learning
7th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), Oct. 2023.
Humanoid Locomotion over Challenging Terrain,” Oct. 2024,
[27] T. Chen, J. Xu, and P. Agrawal, “A System for General In-Hand
arXiv:2410.03654 [cs].
Object Re-Orientation,” in Proceedings of the 5th Conference on
[6] F. Wu, X. Nal, J. Jang, W. Zhu, Z. Gu, A. Wu, and Y. Zhao,
Robot Learning. PMLR, Jan. 2022, pp. 297–307.
“Learn to Teach: Sample-Efficient Privileged Learning for Humanoid
[28] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
Locomotion over Diverse Terrains,” Mar. 2025, arXiv:2402.06783
“Asymmetric Actor Critic for Image-Based Robot Learning,” Oct.
[cs].
2017, arXiv:1710.06542 [cs].
[7] J. Siekmann, K. Green, J. Warila, A. Fern, and J. Hurst, “Blind
[29] D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, and P. Kra¨henbu¨hl, “Learning by
Bipedal Stair Traversal via Sim-to-Real Reinforcement Learning,” in
Cheating,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning.
Robotics: Science and Systems XVII. Robotics: Science and Systems
PMLR, May 2020, pp. 66–75.
Foundation, Jul. 2021.
[30] M. Bansal, A. Krizhevsky, and A. Ogale, “ChauffeurNet: Learning to
[8] F. Jenelten, J. He, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “DTC: Deep Tracking
Drive by Imitating the Best and Synthesizing the Worst,” Dec. 2018,
Control,” Science Robotics, vol. 9, no. 86, p. eadh5401, Jan. 2024,
arXiv:1812.03079 [cs].
arXiv:2309.15462 [cs, eess].
[31] A. Bewley, J. Rigley, Y. Liu, J. Hawke, R. Shen, V.-D. Lam, and
[9] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter,
A. Kendall, “Learning to Drive from Simulation without Real World
“Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Science
Labels,” Dec. 2018, arXiv:1812.03823 [cs].
robotics, vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020.
[32] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
[10] H. Duan, A. Malik, M. S. Gadde, J. Dao, A. Fern, and J. Hurst, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint
“Learning Dynamic Bipedal Walking Across Stepping Stones,” in arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
[33] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “Mujoco: A physics engine for
Systems (IROS), Oct. 2022, pp. 6746–6752, iSSN: 2153-0866. model-based control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on
[11] Z. Zhuang, Z. Fu, J. Wang, C. Atkeson, S. Schwertfeger, C. Finn, and intelligent robots and systems. IEEE, 2012, pp. 5026–5033.
H. Zhao, “Robot Parkour Learning,” Sep. 2023, arXiv:2309.05665
[cs].