===== PAGE 1 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 1
AME-2: Agile and Generalized Legged Locomotion via
Attention-Based Neural Map Encoding
Chong Zhang123∗, Victor Klemm1, Fan Yang1, Marco Hutter1
Website: https://sites.google.com/leggedrobotics.com/ame-2
Abstract—Achieving agile and generalized legged locomotion errors in estimation and mapping, especially under visual oc-
across terrains requires tight integration of perception and clusions and violations of modeling assumptions [4]. Elevation
control, especially under occlusions and sparse footholds. Existing
maps are often updated at lower rates than the control loop
methods have demonstrated agility on parkour courses but often
and heuristically filtered [2], [4], [11], which often requires
rely on end-to-end sensorimotor models with limited generaliza-
tion and interpretability. By contrast, methods targeting general- per-terrain tuning to ensure safety and makes it difficult to
ized locomotion typically exhibit limited agility and struggle with obtain a general solution for diverse terrains that demand agile
visual occlusions. We introduce AME-2, a unified reinforcement motions. Moreover, the optimization and planning components
learning (RL) framework for agile and generalized locomotion
in these pipelines tend to be computationally heavy, which
that incorporates a novel attention-based map encoder in the
can limit agility on real robots. These limitations motivate
control policy. This encoder extracts local and global mapping
features and uses attention mechanisms to focus on salient learning-based approaches such as RL that can better exploit
regions, producing an interpretable and generalized embedding raw sensor data, operate under uncertainty, and produce more
for RL-based control. We further propose a learning-based dynamic behaviors.
mapping pipeline that provides fast, uncertainty-aware terrain
Learning-based methods, in particular RL, have recently
representations robust to noise and occlusions, serving as policy
shown strong potential for legged locomotion [12]. One line
inputs. It uses neural networks to convert depth observations into
local elevations with uncertainties, and fuses them with odometry. of work combines RL with classical state estimation and
The pipeline also integrates with parallel simulation so that we mapping pipelines, using elevation maps or related representa-
can train controllers with online mapping, aiding sim-to-real tions as policy inputs [13]–[26]. These methods can improve
transfer. We validate AME-2 with the proposed mapping pipeline
robustness and generalization compared to purely model-
on a quadruped and a biped robot, and the resulting controllers
based controllers, but they also inherit the computational cost
demonstrate strong agility and generalization to unseen terrains
in simulation and in real-world experiments. and failure modes of the underlying estimation and mapping
systems [27], [28]. In simulation, noise is typically injected
Index Terms—Legged Robots, Humanoid and Bipedal Loco-
into both the state estimates and the mapping observations. A
motion, Motion Control, Reinforcement Learning.
common strategy is to assume a fully observed egocentric map
during training and then tune the real-world mapping stack to
I. INTRODUCTION
approximate this assumption [13], [15], [21], which simplifies
AGILE and generalized locomotion is essential for legged training but can make performance sensitive when occlusions
robots to operate reliably in diverse real-world environ- occur or when agile whole-body contacts violate estimator
ments. It requires tightly coupled real-time perception and assumptions. Another strategy is to heavily randomize state-
control, robustness to sensor noise and occlusions, agility estimation and mapping noise so that the controller becomes
through whole-body control, and precise behavior on terrains robust and conservative under mapping uncertainties in dense
with sparse footholds. Designing such perceptive locomotion terrains [14], yet such policies tend to struggle on terrains that
systems that are simultaneously agile and able to generalize require very high agility or precise foothold placement.
across diverse terrains remains a critical challenge. More recently, neural network–based mapping has been
Classical pipelines address perceptive locomotion by com- explored, where networks are trained in simulation to re-
bining model-based control with explicit mapping and state es- construct maps that can be used as policy inputs [29]–[34].
timation [1]–[8]. Typically, they maintain a state estimator [9], While this yields efficient mapping suitable for real-time
build elevation maps from sensor data [10], [11], and use control, the learned mappings are usually fitted to particular
model-based planning and control methods to command the terrain distributions and sensor configurations, offer limited
robot based on this mapping information. These approaches generalization to unseen terrains, and do not explicitly model
have proven effective for deliberate walking and carefully uncertainties such as occlusions.
planned maneuvers on moderately structured terrain, where Another line of work directly maps raw exteroceptive per-
accurate state estimation and dense, slowly changing maps can ception and proprioception to actions [35]–[47]. These sen-
be maintained. However, their reliance on precise models and sorimotor policies have demonstrated highly agile behaviors
often deterministic optimal control makes them sensitive to on challenging courses [36], [38], [42], but typically exhibit
limited generalization beyond the training environments and
1Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland offer little interpretability, since terrain reasoning is implicitly
2Secure, Reliable, and Intelligent Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
encoded in the policy. More recent sensorimotor general-
3ETH AI Center, Switzerland
∗Corresponding: chong.zhang@ai.ethz.ch ist models [48] distill a single policy from multiple expert
6202
raM
42
]OR.sc[
2v58480.1062:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 2
Fig. 1. Our method enables agile and generalized legged locomotion across diverse terrains with onboard sensing and computation.
controllers to achieve strong performance, yet such methods mapping stacks while maintaining generalization. The pipeline
still show limited generalization to unseen terrains and of- projects depth images into local grids and uses a lightweight
ten require finetuning on new terrains, as evaluated in our neural network trained via Bayesian learning [51] to predict
benchmarks (Sec. VII). Overall, existing RL-based approaches local elevations with per-cell uncertainty estimates. These local
tend to trade off agility, generalization, mapping efficiency, maps are fused into a consistent global frame with odometry,
and interpretability rather than addressing these requirements providing a fast and uncertainty-aware representation that
within a unified framework. accounts for occlusions and sensor noise. We then query
In this work, we present AME-2, a unified RL framework egocentric elevations and associated uncertainties as the map
for perceptive legged locomotion with an Attention-based Map inputs for the controller. This design is inspired by [52],
Encoding architecture trained jointly with the controller. The which fuses per-frame map predictions instead of training
AME-2 encoder, built upon the design in [15], first extracts temporal networks for off-road navigation, thereby reducing
local features (pixel-wise representation of terrain details) and data requirements and mitigating overfitting. Furthermore, we
global features (capturing global terrain context) from the synthesize random terrain data, including many terrains that
elevation map, then uses the global features together with are not feasible for the robots, to broaden the training distri-
proprioception to assign attention weights to the local features. bution for the local map predictor and improve generalization.
The resulting weighted local features are concatenated with The same mapping pipeline runs both in parallel simulation
the global features and proprioception to form a terrain-aware and on the real robots, enabling online mapping during training
representation for policy learning. This design allows the rather than relying on idealized or hand-tuned maps. For train-
policy to downweigh local regions that are less relevant for ing efficiency, we adopt a teacher–student scheme [48], [53]:
the current task, improving generalization to new terrains. a teacher policy is first trained with ground-truth elevation
Because the attention is conditioned on global terrain context, maps, and a student policy with the same AME-2 architecture
the policy can also learn distinct attention and motion patterns is then trained using the proposed mapping under teacher
across different terrains. To enable learning agile controllers supervision alongside RL. The resulting student policy is
with this representation, we adopt a goal-reaching locomotion directly deployable, operates with the lightweight, uncertainty-
formulation from prior works [20], [26], [32], [40], [49], [50] aware mapping in the loop, and retains the generalization and
and adapt it so that the same reward functions and training agility of the teacher.
settings can be used for different robots. Together, the AME- We evaluate AME-2 on an ANYmal-D quadruped [54] and
2 encoder and unified training formulation enable training a a LimX TRON1 biped [55] both in simulation and on real
single generalist policy with terrain-aware skills, which in our hardware. As shown in Fig. 1, the resulting controllers exhibit
experiments exhibits strong generalization to unseen terrains strong agility and robust generalization to a wide range of
while maintaining high agility. terrains. The proposed mapping pipeline produces high-quality
To enable real-world deployment of agile and generalized elevation maps in real time, supporting these agile motions
locomotion controllers, we develop a learning-based elevation with onboard perception and computation.
mapping pipeline to remove the dependency on classical The main contributions of this work are summarized as

===== PAGE 3 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 3
follows: environments. In contrast, our work combines a fully RL-
1) We propose AME-2, a unified RL framework with based controller with a learned mapping module designed for
an attention-based map encoder to achieve agile and generalization. As a result, our policies achieve agility com-
generalized legged locomotion. parable to previous state of the art while enabling generalized
2) We develop a lightweight, uncertainty-aware elevation locomotion across diverse terrains.
mapping pipeline that generalizes to diverse terrains,
explicitly models occlusions and noise, and helps bridge B. Perceptive Locomotion with Raw Sensor Data
the sim-to-real gap.
Perceptive locomotion with raw sensor data seeks to bypass
3) We use a teacher-student scheme that yields deployable
the limitations of explicit mapping. Instead of constructing and
controllers using the learned mapping while retaining
maintaining a map, some works directly train policies from
agility, generalization, and interpretability.
camera images [35]–[39], [41]–[47] or lidar point clouds [40].
4) We demonstrate a state-of-the-art combination of
Early approaches in this direction still separate perception
agility and generalization with a quadruped and a biped
and control: a visual module outputs footholds or trajectories,
robot across diverse challenging terrains under the same
which are then tracked by model-based controllers [57]. Be-
training setup.
tween explicit mapping and fully end-to-end policies, other
works learn intermediate representations from raw sensors
II. RELATED WORKS (such as ray distances [49] and neural volumetric mem-
A. Perceptive Locomotion with Explicit Mapping ory [58]) that remain cheap to compute while enabling fast
control.
Early explorations of perceptive locomotion use model-
Many recent methods adopt a monolithic design, where a
based methods with either prebuilt maps or classical online
single neural network maps raw sensor streams and proprio-
mapping. Most of them first perform foothold or trajectory
ception directly to joint commands. Within this family, some
planning and then apply a model-based tracking controller [1]–
distill deployable student policies from privileged teacher
[3], [5]–[8], while some directly optimize a reactive controller
policies — often using maps as privileged inputs — to achieve
over feasible footholds [4]. Although these methods offer
efficient and stable learning [35], [36], [38], [42], [43], [46],
strong guarantees and can generalize well under their modeling
[48], while others learn from scratch with the help of repre-
assumptions, their real-world performance is limited by model
sentation learning techniques such as world models [44] or
mismatch, state-estimation uncertainties, mapping errors, and
privileged-information reconstruction [41], [45]. The current
computational burden.
state of the art in agile generalist locomotion [48] trains
To address these limitations, RL emerges as an alternative
multiple mapping-based teacher controllers and distills them
for perceptive locomotion [12]. One line of work keeps a
into a single generalist student policy that operates directly on
strong model-based component and uses RL mainly as an add-
raw depth images. This student policy combines the skills of
on [21], [22], [56]. DTC [21] augments a model-based planner
the teachers and can be finetuned efficiently on new terrains.
with an RL tracking controller to improve robustness while
However, its zero-shot generalization to previously unseen
maintaining generalization, but the planner remains sensitive
environments is limited.
to mapping uncertainties and constrains agility through its
In contrast, our work also trains neural networks from raw
modeling assumptions and computational cost. RLOC [22]
sensor data, but uses them exclusively within the mapping
instead uses a model-based controller to track an RL planner,
process rather than in a monolithic perception-to-action policy.
yet the overall performance is capped by the limitations of the
Because our learned mapping is lightweight and well suited
controller.
to massive parallelization in simulation, we can run the full
Other approaches remove the model-based modules entirely
mapping loop during training and then deploy exactly the same
while still relying on explicit maps. When given prebuilt
mapping at test time, preserving both speed and consistency.
maps, RL controllers can exhibit highly agile motions [26].
Without training a monolithic policy that directly maps raw
With classical online mapping, they outperform model-based
sensor data to joint actions, we still obtain an agile controller
counterparts in terms of agility and robustness [13]–[19], [23],
while also achieving strong generalization across diverse ter-
[24], but their agility remains limited by the update rate and
rains.
quality of the mapping. In addition, many such controllers
suffer from generalization issues, as they tend to overfit to the
C. Learning-Based Mapping
training terrains [21]. A recent work [15] shows that RL can
achieve generalized locomotion across diverse terrains, but its Learning-based mapping aims to retain the structure and
agility is still constrained by the online classical mapping stack interpretability of explicit maps while overcoming the compu-
and the learning framework. tational and modeling limitations of classical mapping. Clas-
More recently, RL-based methods have begun to use learned sical mapping pipelines combine geometric projection, hand-
maps, where neural networks reconstruct egocentric terrains tuned filtering, and probabilistic fusion to produce high-quality
for the controller in real time [29]–[34]. These approaches maps, and can handle a wide range of complex terrains [10],
demonstrate strong agility and successful real-world deploy- [11], [23], [24]. However, these methods are often too slow for
ment, but the learned maps often fit the training distribu- agile locomotion and require heuristic, terrain-specific filtering
tion and show limited generalization in unseen, unstructured to cope with occlusions and sensor noise.

===== PAGE 4 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 4
Simulation
RL Optimization
Proprioception
Privileged Teacher Policy Joint Actions
Ground-Truth Mapping
Supervision RL Optimization
Proprioception
Deployable Student Policy Joint Actions
Online Neural Mapping
Depth Cloud & Odometry
Fig. 2. An overview of our system. We use RL to train a teacher policy with ground-truth mapping in simulation, and a student policy under the teacher’s
supervision with our proposed neural mapping. The policies output joint-level actions that actuate the robots to reach position and heading goals, as illustrated
by the yellow wireframes.
To enable faster control, several works directly train ter- PPO [60] in parallel simulation [61]. By maximizing goal-
rain reconstruction modules in or after the policy training reaching rewards (detailed in Sec. IV), the policies learn agile
loop [29]–[34]. These learned mappings can infer local geome- locomotion skills that enable them to traverse diverse terrains.
try quickly enough to support agile controllers, but are usually We first train a privileged teacher policy and then transfer the
trained on a narrow distribution of environments, showing skills to a deployable student policy, which is also detailed in
limited generalization beyond the training terrains. Sec. IV.
Recent off-road navigation approaches take a different route
to obtain uncertainty-aware neural mapping with improved
B. Controller Inputs and Outputs
accuracy and data efficiency. In particular, [52] leverages
Our controllers run at 50 Hz. The policy actions a are joint
neural processes [59] to model terrain elevation: a network pre-
PD targets [62] tracked at 400 Hz on real hardware.
dicts per-frame local elevation maps together with associated
Proprioception observations include base linear velocity v
uncertainties, which are then fused over time using odometry. b
(only accessible to the teacher), base angular velocity ω ,
By predicting local maps with uncertainty instead of learning a b
projected gravity g , joint positions q, joint velocities q˙,
fully end-to-end sensor-to-map model, this approach reduces b
previous actions, and goal commands c.
the data requirements for accurate estimation and improves
Ground-truth mapping represents each point in the ego-
generalization in complex off-road environments. However, the
centric elevation grid by its 3D coordinates (x,y,z). Our
computational costs of the models in [52] are too high (each
neural mapping augments this with an uncertainty channel and
environment takes > 13 GB GPU memory) and cannot be
produces a 4D representation (x,y,z,u) for each point, where
deployed with thousands of parallel simulation environments.
u is the uncertainty metric.
Inspired by these ideas, we design a learning-based ele-
vation mapping module tailored for agile legged locomotion.
We project depth-camera point clouds into local elevation grids IV. LOCOMOTION CONTROL
and train lightweight, robust networks to predict local elevation A. Policy Architecture and AME-2 Encoder
and its uncertainty from these inputs, which are then fused over
The general policy architecture is illustrated in Fig. 3, with
time using odometry. This design suppresses sensor noise and
the AME-2 encoder serving as the core feature extractor for the
naturally models occlusions as regions of high uncertainty.
mapping input. We have a proprioception encoder to embed
We further improve generalization through extensive random-
proprioceptive observations, and the AME-2 encoder to embed
ization in a custom data pipeline. The resulting module is
the map observations based on the proprioception embedding.
lightweight enough to run in massively parallel simulation and
We feed both the proprioception embedding and the map
fast enough to support highly agile motions in deployment,
embedding through a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to output
while providing an uncertainty-aware terrain representation for
the actions.
our controllers.
The AME-2 encoder first extracts local map features with
a convolutional neural network (CNN) and computes a po-
III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW sitional embedding for each point with an MLP. These are
then fused by another MLP to obtain pointwise local features.
A. Formulation
Next, an additional MLP followed by max pooling over the
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we use RL to train terrain-aware pointwise features produces global features that capture the
locomotion policies that reach position and heading goals. overall terrain context. We combine these global features with
We formulate the problem as a partially observable Markov a proprioceptive embedding through an MLP to obtain a
decision process (POMDP) and optimize the policies using query vector, which is used in a multi-head attention (MHA)

===== PAGE 5 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 5
Teacher
Proprioception Proprioception Encoder
Base Lin. Vel.
Base Ang. Vel.
Proj. Gravity
Proprioception Embedding MLP Decoder Actions
Joint Pos.
Joint Vel.
Mapping AME-2 Encoder Map Embedding Prev. Actions
Commands
MLP
Pointwise Local Features Global Features
MLP & MaxPool
Proprioception Embedding
Weighted
MLP Multi-Head Attention Local Features Student
V K Q
Positional Embedding Local Embedding
LSIO
MLP CNN
MLP
MLP
(remove channels)
Mapping Proprioception Embedding
Proprioception Embedding
Fig. 3. An illustration of our AME-2 policy architecture. Left top: The general abstract of our policies. Proprioceptive observations are encoded into a
proprioception embedding, which is used together with the mapping as the inputs of the AME-2 encoder to produce the map embedding. The proprioception
embedding and the map embedding are then concatenated and fed into an MLP to generate actions. Left bottom: The AME-2 encoder design. We extract
both local features and global features from the map, and then use the global features and the proprioception embedding to produce the attention-weighted
local features. L and W are the length and width of the map, dmap is the dimension of map representation (3 for the teacher, 4 for the student), dPE is the
dimension of proprioception embedding. Right: The proprioception encoder designs. We have different designs for teacher and student policies to facilitate
sim-to-real transfer, while both designs can fit into our overall architecture.
module [63] with the pointwise local features serving as keys the student’s proprioception embedding.
and values. This yields a weighted local feature embedding
that focuses on important terrain regions based on the current
proprioceptive state and global context. Finally, the global
B. Asymmetric Actor Critic
features and weighted local features are concatenated to form
the map embedding fed into the policy’s action decoder.
We adopt asymmetric actor–critic training [67]. For the
This design builds on the attention-based map encoder in critic, we do not use the same attention-based design as in the
previous work [15], which we refer to as AME-1 for clarity. actor, because the critic does not need to generalize beyond
Unlike the AME-1 encoder, our AME-2 encoder additionally the training terrains and optimizing an MHA module with
computes global features and uses them to weigh the local fea- (L × W) local feature inputs is costly. Instead, we use the
tures. This enables more generalized locomotion over complex mixture-of-experts (MoE) design from [68], which is powerful
terrains, where motion patterns should vary with the terrain. for function fitting yet much more computationally efficient
We demonstrate the resulting performance gap between AME- to optimize. Note that, although we can train a generalized
1 and AME-2 encoders in Sec. VI and Sec. VII. teacher with our policy architecture and an MoE critic, an
The choice of proprioception encoder in our architecture MoE actor does not yield a generalized teacher, as shown in
is flexible, as long as it produces an effective proprioception Sec. VII.
embedding. Hence, we use different designs for the teacher On top of the noiseless proprioceptive observations used by
and the student. For the teacher, since ground-truth propri- the teacher actor and the ground-truth map, we additionally
oceptive observations are available, we use a plain MLP provide the contact state of each link to the critic. We do not
over them to obtain the proprioception embedding. For the provide such contact information to the teacher, since we can
student, because of various environmental uncertainties and already train a robust, generalized teacher without it, and a
following lessons from previous works [64]–[66], we stack the larger information gap between teacher and student can hurt
proprioceptive observations (except base linear velocities and student training [69]. We also apply left-right symmetry aug-
commands) from the past 20 steps and use Long-Short I/O mentation from [32] to the critic to improve sample efficiency
(LSIO) [66] to obtain a temporal embedding of both robot and motion style, but not to the actor to avoid additional
states and environment dynamics. This temporal embedding computational cost of actor optimization. The critic design is
and the commands are then jointly fed into an MLP to produce shared for the teacher and the student.

===== PAGE 6 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 6
TABLE I
REWARDS FOR CONTROLLER TRAINING.
Reward Term Expression Weight (×dτ∗) Notes
Task Rewards
Position Tracking Eq. (1) 100
Heading Tracking Eq. (3) 50
Moving to Goal Eq. (4) 5
Standing at Goal Eq. (5) 5
Regularization and Penalties
Early Termination 1 if early termination triggered −10/dτ
Undesired Events 1 for each undesired event −1
Base Roll Rate [ω b ]2 x −0.1
Joint Regularization ∥q˙∥2 +0.01∥τ∥2 +0.001∥q¨∥2 −0.001 τ denotes the joint torques
Action Smoothness ∥at −at−1∥2 −0.01
Link Contact Forces ∥max(Fcon −G,0)∥2 −0.00001 Fcon denotes the contact forces for each link and
G is the robot weight
Link Acceleration (cid:80) l ∥v˙ l ∥ −0.001 v l is the velocity of link l; summing over all links
Simulation Fidelity summing over all joints
Joint Position Limits (cid:80)
j
max(0,qj −0.95q
j
max,0.95q
j
min −qj) −1000 q
j
max and q
j
min are position limits for joint j
Joint Velocity Limits (cid:80)
j
max(0,|q˙j|−0.9q˙
j
max) −1 q˙
j
max is the velocity limit for joint j
Joint Torque Limits (cid:80)
j
max(0,|τj|−0.8τ
j
max) −1 τ
j
max is the torque limit for joint j
∗dτ = 0.02 sec is the policy interval.
C. Teacher-Student RL Intuitively, these two tracking rewards encourage the robot
to be at the goal position with the desired heading at the
We use Teacher–Student RL [14], [48], [53], [70] to facil-
end of the episode, without constraining how it reaches the
itate sim-to-real transfer. Although directly training a student
goal, thereby allowing complex locomotion skills to emerge
policy with our mapping pipeline is also possible, simulation
for traversing terrains.
can run at only about half the speed compared to using ground-
To further facilitate exploration, we introduce a moving-to-
truth mapping and requires significantly more GPU memory,
goal reward:
making it computationally inefficient for us.
Our student training objective linearly combines the RL (cid:16)
r = 1 d < 0.5 ∨
losses from PPO, the action distillation losses from [53], and move xy
a representation loss given by the mean squared error between (cid:0) cosθ > 0.5 ∧ v ≤ ∥[v ] ∥ ≤ v (cid:1)(cid:17) ,
vb,goal min b xy max
the teacher and student map embeddings. In practice, we also
(4)
disable the PPO surrogate loss during the first few iterations
while using a large learning rate. These design choices enable where θ vb,goal is the angle between the base velocity and the
stable, efficient, and well-aligned student training, which we vector from the base to the goal position, v min = 0.3m/s is
will ablate in Sec. VII. the lower bound of the horizontal base velocity [v b ] xy to be
considered as moving, and v = 2m/s is an upper bound
max
chosen according to hardware and SLAM constraints. In other
D. Environments
words, r = 1 if the robot is already close to the goal or if it
1) Rewards: We use three types of rewards shared across move
is moving roughly towards the goal, and r = 0 otherwise.
both quadruped and biped training environments, as listed in move
To enforce a stable standing posture after reaching the goal,
Table I: task rewards which incentivize goal-reaching behav-
we define the standing reward:
iors, regularization rewards which improve stability and safety,
and simulation-fidelity rewards, which penalize near-limit joint r stand =1(d xy < 0.5 ∧ d yaw < 0.5)
states that can cause unrealistic simulation. (cid:18) d + d + d + d (cid:19) (5)
· exp − foot g q xy ,
There are four task reward terms, respectively for goal 4
position tracking, goal heading tracking, moving towards goal,
where d is the number of feet not in contact divided by
and standing at goal. Following [49], we define the position foot
the total number of feet, d = 1 − [g ]2 measures the base
tracking reward as g b z
tilt relative to gravity, and d is the mean deviation of joint
q
1
r = · t (4), (1) positions from the standing reference. This reward ensures the
position tracking 1 + 0.25d2 xy mask robot maintains a static, upright configuration at the goal.
where d is the horizontal distance from the robot to the goal The regularization and simulation fidelity rewards are pre-
xy
position, and t (·) is a time-based mask function defined sented in Table I. We set all weights to integer powers of 10,
mask
as and make each term’s contribution 1 ∼ 2 orders of magnitude
1
smaller than the task rewards. This enables successful learning
t (T) = · 1(t < T), (2)
mask T left without extensive weight tuning.
with t denoting the remaining time of the current episode. In the regularization rewards, we penalize each occurrence
left
Further, we define the heading tracking reward as of these undesired events:
1 • Spinning too fast: Yaw rate |[ω b ] z | > 2.0rad/s, which can
r = · t (2) · 1(d < 0.5), (3)
heading tracking 1 + d2 mask xy trigger drifts in the odometry.
yaw

===== PAGE 7 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 7
Training Terrains ① Dense ② Climbing ③ Sparse
Rough ① Stair Up ① Stair Down ① Boxes ①
Obstacles ① Climbing Up ② Climbing Down ② Climbing Consecutive ②
Gap ③ Pallets ③ Stones ③ Beam ③
Test Terrains
Test 1: Irregular Stones ③ Test 2: Stones-Pallet-Climbing ②+③ Test 3: Parkour w/ Obstacles ①+②+③ Test 4: Debris ①+②+③
Fig. 4. Training and Test Terrains. We train our locomotion policies on primitive terrains of three categories: ⃝1 dense, ⃝2 climbing, and ⃝3 sparse. To test
generalization, we evaluate the policies on four terrains that are either entirely unseen or combinations of training and/or unseen terrains.
• Leaping on flat terrain: All feet are off the ground when Unlike previous works [19], [23], [33], we do not explicitly
the elevation difference is < 30 cm. reward or penalize foot contact positions in sparse terrains;
• Non-foot contacts: We penalize both general non-foot instead, we formulate rewards for all robot links to enable
contacts and non-foot contact switches (from no contact emergent whole-body contacts. Those foothold position re-
to contact). We separate these to allow stable interactions wards are also difficult to define in a terrain-agnostic way:
when necessary (e.g., climbing) while discouraging un- for example, quadruped climbing benefits from active knee
necessary non-foot contacts. contacts and near-edge foot placements, as shown in Fig. 10,
• Stumbling: Any link having a horizontal contact force whereas on sparse terrains near-edge foot placements are
larger than the vertical force. undesirable.
• Slippage: Any link moving while in contact.
• Self-collision: Collisions between robot links. 2) Termination: To facilitate training, we set the following
early termination conditions:

===== PAGE 8 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 8
• Bad orientation: The projected gravity vector satisfies
(a)
|[g ] | > 0.985, |[g ] | > 0.7, or [g ] > 0.0 (robot
b x b y b z
flipped).
• Base collision: The base link experiences a contact force
larger than the robot’s total weight.
• High thigh acceleration: The acceleration of any thigh
link exceeds a specific threshold when the corresponding
foot is in contact. We design this to reduce impact during
jumping, as stiff landings can damage hardware or reduce (b)
lifespan. Interestingly, we use typical data from dog
(60 m/s2 [71]) and human (100 m/s2 [72]) biokinet-
ics literature, and they directly work to emerge impact
absorption or avoidance behaviors, which is shown in
Sec. VI.
• Stagnation: Movement in the past 5s is less than 0.5m
while the robot is still > 1m away from the goal position.
Triggering any of these conditions terminates the episode
Fig. 5. The controller can reuse the built map for the same terrain, enabled
immediately and incurs early termination penalties.
by our mapping randomization. (a) When the robot moves in the direction of
the dotted orange arrow, it observes a partial map of the staircase (visualized
3) Terrains and Curriculum: We train our controllers on on the right). (b) After going down along the solid orange arrow, it perceives
primitive terrains and evaluate generalization on complex test a complete map of the staircase (visualized on the right) when attempting to
move back along the dotted orange arrow.
terrains. Both are shown in Fig. 4, while quantitative results are
presented in Sec. VII. We use a terrain curriculum that scales
Implementation details are provided in Appendix B.
difficulty from easy to hard (detailed in Appendix A), similar
to [26]. To stabilize learning across different challenging ter-
rains, we estimate the robot’s success rate using an exponential E. Training and Deployment
moving average. If the robot reaches the goal and its estimated
1) Training Setup: We train our controllers in Isaac
success rate exceeds 0.5, we promote the environment to the
Gym [61] with the PPO implementation in RSL-RL [74]. The
next difficulty level. Conversely, the level is demoted if the
both teacher policies are trained with 80000 iterations, and
robot remains > 4 m away from the goal (which is the average
the both student policies are trained with 40000 iterations
starting distance). Once the robot passes the highest level, the
(surrogate loss disabled during first 5000 iterations). The
environment resets to a random difficulty.
hyperparameters are listed in Appendix C. The training cost
Additionally, we use a perception noise curriculum and an
for the ANYmal-D policies is ∼ 60 RTX-4090-days with 8
initial heading curriculum. In the first 20% iterations of teacher
GPUs in parallel. The training cost for the TRON1 policies is
training, we linearly increase mapping noise from zero to the
∼ 30 RTX-4090-days with 4 GPUs in parallel.
maximum level, and simultaneously expand the initial heading
The difference between both robots’ training costs are due
from facing the goal to a random yaw in [−π,π].
to the mapping sizes. For ANYmal-D, we use a map of size
4) Domain Randomization: We employ domain randomiza- 36×14, with 8-cm resolution, centered at x = 0.6 m,y = 0 m
tion [73] during training to enhance robustness and facilitate in the base frame. For TRON1, we use a map of size 18×13,
sim-to-real transfer. We apply the following randomization with 8-cm resolution, centered at x = 0.32 m,y = 0 m in the
setup: base frame. These numbers are designed based on the robot
dimensions and terrain sizes.
• Robot Dynamics: We uniformly randomize the payload,
friction coefficients, and actuation delays. For the TRON1
biped, we additionally randomize PD gains and motor 2) Deployment Setup: We deploy the controllers using
armatures, following [15]. ONNX Runtime [75]. On the onboard Intel Core i7-8850H
• Observation Noise: We apply uniform noises to the policy CPUs, the policy inference time is approximately 2 ms.
observations. We also degrade the student’s depth clouds
by simulating missing points and sensor artifacts. 3) Other Sim-to-Real Designs: We model the actuator
• Mapping: During student training, we randomly select a dynamics for sim-to-real transfer. In simulation, we use the
subset of environments to access complete maps, while actuator network [76] for ANYmal-D, and an identified DC-
others rely on partial online maps. This setup enables motor model for TRON1. We clip the applied torques using
map reuse when the robot traverses the same terrain the joint torque-velocity constraints in [77].
repeatedly, as illustrated in Fig. 5. We also corrupt the To enable continuous deployment (infinite-horizon execu-
student’s mapping by randomly removing points and tion), we define the command observations differently from
assigning random height values with high uncertainties. prior goal-reaching works [48]–[50]. Following prior practice,
Additionally, we simulate mapping drifts for both the the critic receives the full command: the goal’s relative posi-
teacher and the student. tion, the sine and cosine of the relative yaw, and the remaining

===== PAGE 9 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 9
Odometry Pose
Global Mapping Local Mapping
Depth Cloud Local Grids Predictions and Uncertainties (High-Uncertainty Points Omitted) (Used by Controller)
Fuse Query
Projection Neural Network
Fig. 6. Our proposed mapping pipeline. For each frame of depth clouds, we project it into local grids, and use a lightweight neural network to predict elevation
estimations with uncertainties. The predictions are then fused into the global map via the odometry, and local maps can be queried from the global map to
serve as the controller inputs. In visualization, the green points indicate the depth points or elevation estimations, and the blue lines indicate the uncertainties.
episode time. The actor, however, receives a modified com- Locomotion Training Terrains Stacked Boxes
mand representation: we clip the observed goal distance to a
maximum of 2m and remove the remaining time. Additionally,
if the actual goal distance exceeds 2m, we randomize the
observed yaw command during training. This design decouples
policy deployment from finite-horizon training and simplifies
steering control.
Random Heightfields Floating Boxes
V. NEURAL MAPPING
A. Mapping Pipeline
Our proposed neural mapping pipeline is illustrated in
Fig. 6. It can not only achieve real-time computation on the
hardware, but also run with thousands of parallel environments
in simulation, thereby bridging the sim-to-real gap with iden-
tical mapping pipelines.
For each sensing frame, we project the point cloud onto Fig. 7. Terrain meshes used for mapping model training. We use four meshes:
thelocomotiontrainingterrains,randomlystackedboxes,randomheightfields,
a local 2D height grid. If multiple points fall into the same
and random floating boxes. The colored points visualized are the elevation
cell, we keep the maximum z-value, which is most relevant scans from random poses.
for locomotion, and we assign a fixed minimum value to cells
An update is considered valid only if the effective measure-
with no points. The resulting local elevations, however, are ment variance is not significantly larger than the prior (σˆ2 <
t
often noisy and incomplete due to occlusions. To mitigate 1.5σ2 ), or if the absolute uncertainty is low (σˆ2 < 0.22).
prior t
this, we use a lightweight CNN trained with Bayesian learning
For valid updates, we determine the probability p of
win
(detailed in Sec. V-B) to jointly predict base-relative elevations
overwriting the map based on the relative precision:
and their uncertainties (in the form of log-variance). The
(σˆ2)−1
predicted uncertainties capture both measurement noise and p = t . (7)
occlusions, while the elevation predictions themselves can also win (σˆ t 2)−1 + (σ p 2 rior )−1
suppress noise.
Finally, the map is updated stochastically. We sample ξ ∼
We then use the odometry poses to fuse these local predic- U[0,1] and let the new prediction take over the cell if the
tions into a global grid map M. It has two layers: the elevation
sample falls within the probability threshold:
layer and the uncertainty layer (in the form of variance).
(cid:40)
The global map is initialized as flat ground at the robot’s (h ,σ2 ) ← (h t ,σˆ t 2) if ξ < p win , (8)
standing height (ground height relative to the base) with large new new (h ,σ2 ) otherwise.
prior prior
uncertainties. At each new frame, given the local elevation
For the controller inputs, we then just query the grids around
estimations with uncertainties and the current base pose, we
the robot pose in the latest global map.
project the local predictions to the global grid cells. For any
This Probabilistic Winner-Take-All strategy offers the fol-
global grid point (u,v) covered by the local grids, we denote
lowing benefits:
the new estimation as h and its uncertainty as σ2, fusing them
t t
with existing values h and σ2 . • The uncertainty of the same occluded point will not
prior prior decrease through consistent predictions.
We do not use standard Bayesian fusion because repeated
observations of the same occluded or uncertain area should not • Over-confident predictions, if not consistent, cannot take
over the cell.
have reduce uncertainties simply due to consistent predictions.
Instead, we employ a Probabilistic Winner-Take-All strategy. • The system can rapidly update the map in response to
dynamic terrain changes when high-confidence measure-
First, we calculate an effective measurement variance σˆ2 that
t ments are available.
is lower-bounded by the prior to prevent over-confidence:
• The pipeline is easy to integrate with parallel simulation,
σˆ2 = max(σ2,0.5 · σ2 ). (6) and fast enough to run on the hardware.
t t prior

===== PAGE 10 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 10
2× CNN 2× CNN
CNN
Input channel=16 channel=16 Uncertainty Output
Concat channel=1
kernel_size=3 kernel_size=3
kernel_size=1
padding=1 padding=1
CNN
Raw Estimation
channel=1
MaxPool
kernel_size=1
kernel_size=3 Upsample
stride=3
CNN
Gating Estimation Output
channel=1 Sigmoid
kernel_size=1
Fig. 8. Mapping model architecture. We use a lightweight U-Net [78] model with a gated residual design for the estimation.
B. Training cases. To mitigate this, we re-weigh samples in each batch
during training using their total variation (TV) [81]:
We train a CNN to predict per-frame elevation estimates
and uncertainties with synthetic data and random terrains. The 1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
TV(Y ) = ∥∇ Y ∥ + ∥∇ Y ∥ ,
technical implementations are detailed below. b HW x b 1 y b 1
(10)
1) Terrains and Data Sampling: We use both the loco- w = TV(Y b ) .
motion training terrain meshes and additional procedurally b (cid:80)B TV(Y ) + ε
b′=1 b′
generated terrains to train the mapping model, as shown in
Here, Y is the ground-truth elevations of the b-th sample in
Fig. 7. Instead of relying on physical simulation, we directly b
a batch, and H and W are the height and width. The weight
sample local elevation grids from random poses above these
w is normalized across the batch, and ε is a small positive
meshes using raytracing with Warp [79], enabling sampling at b
constant. By doing so, we assign higher weights to samples
hundreds of thousands of frames per second on a single RTX
with larger elevation variations.
4090 GPU.
We use a shallow U-Net [78] model with a gated residual
2) Training Data Synthesis: We apply the following aug-
design, as illustrated in Fig. 8. The CNNs output the uncer-
mentations to the sampled local elevation grids:
tainty, a raw estimation, and a gating map. The final estimation
• additive uniform noise with random magnitude on each is obtained by the gated combination of the raw estimation and
cell;
the input, preserving accuracy in clearly observed areas while
• random cropping of the map from the four borders; selectively overwriting noisy or occluded areas.
• simulated occlusions with random sensor positions and We train the models on 54 million frames for each robot,
field of view;
each model takes less than 1 hour to converge. For ANYmal-
• random ranges to clip the elevations; D, the local grids are of shape 51×31, with 4-cm resolution,
• random missing points and outliers at random ratios. centered at x = 1.0 m,y = 0 m in the base frame. For
By doing so, we synthesize diverse, noisy, and partially TRON1, the local grids are of shape 31 × 31, with 4-cm
observable local grids as the model inputs, and the original resolution, centered at x = 0.6 m,y = 0 m in the base frame.
ground-truth elevations as the labels.
3) Model and Optimization: We train the model to recon- C. Simulation Integration and Deployment
struct the ground-truth elevations with β−NLL loss (β = 0.5)
When deployed in simulation with 1000 parallel ANYmal-D
from [80]:
environments, the model’s inference time is below 0.3 ms, and
(cid:20) (cid:18) logσˆ2(X) (Y − µˆ(X))2(cid:19)(cid:21) the GPU memory consumption is about 3 GB (for TRON1,
L = E sg[σˆ(X)] + ,
0.5 X,Y 2 2σˆ2(X) these numbers are roughly 60% of those for ANYmal-D).
(9) Storing 8,m × 8,m global maps for 1000 environments re-
where X denotes the inputs, Y denotes the ground-truth ele- quires about 0.3 GB, and the global map size can be flexibly
vations, and µˆ(X) and σˆ2(X) denote the predicted estimation chosen since we recenter the map around the robot when it
and variance, respectively. The operator sg[·] denotes the stop- approaches the boundary. Obtaining depth clouds and handling
gradient operation. Compared to the standard negative log- other intermediate overheads takes an additional ∼ 1.2 GB of
likelihood (NLL) loss used in classical Bayesian learning [51], GPU memory per 1000 ANYmal-D environments.
this formulation reduces the tendency of the model to overesti- On real hardware, the mapping pipeline takes approximately
mate uncertainty on hard samples to trivially reduce the loss. It 5 ms per frame on the onboard CPU, with around 2.5 ms spent
encourages the model to output high uncertainty when accurate on model inference using ONNX Runtime. This enables fast,
predictions are not possible, and low uncertainty together with low-latency mapping that can keep up with the depth camera’s
accurate predictions when they are, thereby capturing the noise frame rate. For ANYmal-D, we merge the point clouds from
and occlusions. two front facing cameras for processing. For TRON1, we use
For batched optimization, terrain roughness can vary signif- the only front facing camera.
icantly across samples. As a result, flat terrains can dominate Regarding odometry, we use CompSLAM [82] with Graph-
the batch loss and reduce the effective emphasis on challenging MSF [83] on ANYmal-D to obtain a high-frequency, accurate

===== PAGE 11 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 11
1) Quadruped Parkour: We demonstrate the agility and
generalization of our trained ANYmal-D controller on a park-
our course, as shown in Fig. 10. This course is not included in
the training terrains of either the locomotion controller or the
mapping model, yet our system can stably traverse it at speeds
of up to 2 m/s, composing climbing and jumping maneuvers.
2) Sparse Terrain Locomotion: As shown in Fig. 11, our
controllers enable both ANYmal-D and TRON1 to traverse a
variety of sparse terrains, many of which are unseen during
training, exhibiting generalization capabilities.
3) Biped maneuvering: To demonstrate the omnidirectional
perceptive locomotion capabilities of our controller, we com-
mand TRON1 to traverse a 38-cm-high platform, a gap, a
staircase, and rough terrain, as shown in Fig. 12. The robot
executes smooth maneuvers in all directions.
4) Robustness: We demonstrate the robustness of our con-
trollers on moving terrains. As shown in Fig. 13, TRON1 can
traverse or balance on a platform cart with unlocked wheels
and spring suspension that can easily tilt to one side with
the robot weight. We also show that ANYmal-D can recover
from unfixed tilted stepping stones using its knees, after an
occasional trip causes a misstep that tilts the blocks.
5) Mapping Results: In Fig. 14, we show the mapping re-
sults after ANYmal-D traverses terrains that are unseen during
training. These maps capture fine-grained terrain details, such
Fig. 9. Our ANYmal-D controller zero-shots the hardest parkour and rubble as gaps and supports, that help the controller achieve agile
pile terrains reported in prior work [32], [48].
and generalized locomotion. Among prior works, only [32]
LiDAR–inertial odometry. On TRON1, we use DLIO [84] has demonstrated maps of comparable quality during agile
instead, as it better handles the platform’s higher accelerations. motions. However, that approach cannot reliably infer unseen
Notably, although these odometry solutions can run reliably parts of obstacles in unstructured terrains [48], is not efficient
at high frequency, their velocity estimates are observed to enough to support concurrent locomotion training, and does
be noisy and delayed. This is intuitive: for example, a 1 cm not explicitly encode uncertainty under partial observations
position drift over a 20 ms timestep can translate to a velocity such as occlusions. For generalized locomotion, explicitly
error of 0.5 m/s, yet has little impact on map fusion. Therefore, modeling uncertainty is important: occluded regions are not
we remove the linear velocity observations from the student completed by learned priors but kept uncertain, and newly
policy. observed geometry can be integrated into the map based on
the predicted uncertainty once it becomes visible.
VI. RESULTS
C. Emergent Behaviors
A. Agility Comparison with Prior Art
1) Active Perception: Trained with partial observations and
We achieve state-of-the-art agility on both ANYmal-D and
uncertainty-aware mapping, our locomotion controllers exhibit
TRON1, measured by the difficulty of the terrains they can
emergent active perception behaviors. In Fig. 15, we exemplify
climb up and down. On ANYmal-D, despite being trained only
this with ANYmal-D attempting to climb onto a high obstacle.
on primitive terrains, our policy zero-shots the hardest parkour
In one attempt, the robot makes contact with the obstacle
and rubble pile terrains reported in prior work [32], [48], as
and cannot immediately climb up, due to its limited field of
shown in Fig. 9. On TRON1, our policy climbs up platforms
view and imperfect depth sensing. This interaction, however,
up to 0.48 m and climbs down up to 0.88 m, while prior work
exposes higher parts of the obstacle to the map. In the
on bipeds reports 0.5 m platforms [17] using the Unitree H1
subsequent attempt, the controller uses this updated map and
robot (with 4× peak torque and 1.5× base height compared
successfully climbs onto the obstacle. The maps are visualized
to TRON1).
to show how information gained from previous interactions is
Across all terrains, our controllers on both robots reach peak
reused to make subsequent movements more informed and
forward velocities above 1.5 m/s, demonstrating a combination
successful.
of agility and terrain-aware locomotion. On top of this agility,
Notably, this addresses a stated limitation of prior state-of-
our controllers also exhibit stronger generalization than exist-
the-art work [48], where a recurrent controller fails to climb
ing methods, as shown below and benchmarked in Sec. VII.
onto a high box when starting close to it due to a lack of
longer-term memory. In contrast, our mapping module ex-
B. Real World Results plicitly maintains long-term spatial information, providing the

===== PAGE 12 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 12
Fig. 10. Our system enables ANYmal-D to move back and forth on a parkour course, a terrain that is unseen during training of both the controller and the
mapping model.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
Fig. 11. Our systems enable ANYmal-D and TRON1 to traverse diverse sparse terrains. (a) ANYmal-D traverses a 19-cm wide balance beam, which is in
the training terrains. (b) TRON1 traverses two unfixed floating 19-cm wide blocks, which make an unseen curved beam terrain. (c) ANYmal-D traverses two
unfixed beams with gaps, which is unseen during training. (d) TRON1 traverses a beam followed by a gap, which is an unseen combination during training.
(e) ANYmal-D traverses two rows of 19-cm wide stepping stones with 10-cm height differences, which is unseen during training. (f) TRON1 traverses
diamond-layout stepping stones, which is unseen during training.
operation by reducing the need for high-frequency, navigation-
level commands (such as velocity commands [13]).
3) Whole-Body Contact: As previously shown in Fig. 10
and Fig. 13, our ANYmal-D controller actively use knee
contacts to help stabilize the robot and traverse challenging
terrains. On one hand, such whole-body contact behaviors
are beneficial for agility and robustness; on the other hand,
because most existing legged robots are designed primarily
for foot contacts, these behaviors may stress the hardware.
That said, we believe that whole-body contact will become
increasingly important for achieving whole-body dexterity in
complex environments [64], [85], [86].
4) Impact Reduction: As mentioned in Sec. IV-D2, we use
Fig. 12. TRON1 maneuvers over a 38-cm-high platform, a gap, a staircase, human and dog motion data to set thigh-acceleration thresh-
and rough terrain, showcasing its omnidirectional perceptive locomotion
olds for early termination. This induces impact-reduction be-
capabilities. Orange arrows indicate the robot’s approximate trajectories.
haviors, as shown in Fig. 17: when climbing down, ANYmal-
D uses its knees to gently touch down, while TRON1 retracts
controller with an effective representation of the environment the support leg to absorb the impact.
over time. Moreover, consistent with [48], we also observe the
robot looking upward while climbing onto platforms, gaining D. Interpretable Feature Patterns
additional terrain information.
We visualize the feature patterns of our ANYmal-D student
2) Loco-Navigation: Since our locomotion controllers are policy’s AME-2 encoder in Fig. 18. For local features, we
trained to reach goals, they also exhibit local navigation visualize their attention weights with a red–blue colormap.
capabilities. As shown in Fig. 16, the controllers can align For global features, which are obtained via max pooling, we
the robot with the terrain before traversal and avoid collisions treat pooled points as selected (weight 1) or not (weight 0)
with obstacles. These behaviors can simplify remote human and average this binary mask over the feature dimension.

===== PAGE 13 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 13
(a) (a) (b) (c)
(b)
Fig. 15. Emergent active perception behavior. (a) In a climb-up attempt,
ANYmal-D collides with the obstacle due to limited field of view and depth
sensing quality. (b) Although unsuccessful, this trial reveals higher parts of
the obstacle in the map, enabling the robot to succeed in the immediate retrial.
(c) ANYmal-D then climbs onto the obstacle. The maps are visualized in the
top-left corner of each subfigure, excluding regions that are never covered by
the cameras.
(c) (a)
(b)
Fig. 13. Our controllers are robust to moving terrains. (a) TRON1 climbs
over an unlocked tiltable platform cart. (b) TRON1 climbs onto and balances
on an unlocked tiltable platform cart. (c) ANYmal-D recovers from unfixed
tilted stepping stones using its knees.
Fig. 16. Emergent local navigation capabilities. (a) TRON1 turns around and
aligns itself with the beam to traverse the terrain. (b) ANYmal-D avoids an
obstacle when reaching the goal.
Terrains Unseen During Training Mapping After Traversal
VII. ABLATIONS AND BENCHMARKING
In this section, we benchmark our design choices on test
terrains (depicted in Fig. 4) that are unseen during training.
All benchmarking experiments are conducted on ANYmal-
D in simulation, where richer prior works and baselines are
available.
A. Teacher Architecture
We compare our teacher policy architecture against two
baselines: AME-1 [15] and MoE [68]. AME-1 is the prior state
of the art in generalized locomotion, outperforming policies
based on MLPs, CNNs, multimodal transformers [37], and
Vision Transformers [87]. The MoE architecture from [68]
has demonstrated strong scalability by enabling a humanoid
to track diverse human motions.
Fig.14. ObtainedmapsafterANYmal-D’straversalofterrainsthatareunseen
The results are summarized in Table II. All architecture
during training. Our mapping supports agile and generalized locomotion. In
the visualizations, meshes represent the estimated elevations, and thin lines designs scale well on the training terrains, highlighting the
indicate the uncertainties. The meshes are colored with a red–blue colormap stability of our training framework. However, MoE shows
to enhance height contrast, excluding regions that are never covered by the
very limited generalization to unseen test terrains. AME-1
cameras.
generalizes well on sparse terrains (test 1) but struggles when
different terrains are mixed (test 2-4), which we attribute to
its encoder assigning attention to local features based only on
By inspecting these feature maps, we observe that local
proprioception, thus missing global context. In contrast, our
attention weights often emphasize fine-grained terrain details,
AME-2 teacher generalizes reliably across all test terrains.
while global features tend to concentrate on a sparse set of
distinctive points across terrain types (e.g., obstacle bound-
B. Student Designs
aries, high platform surfaces, and beam centers). We also find
that these patterns persist on test terrains, which helps explain Having a generalized teacher does not automatically yield
our controller’s generalization to unseen terrains despite being a generalized deployable student. We therefore compare our
trained only on primitive terrains. AME-2 student against the following baselines:

===== PAGE 14 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 14
TABLE II
SUCCESS RATES (%) OF DIFFERENT TEACHER ARCHITECTURES ON TRAINING AND TEST TERRAINS
Training Terrains Test Terrains
Teacher Architecture
Dense Climbing Sparse Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Test 4 avg. Test
AME-2 (Teacher) 97.9 96.0 95.2 96.8 93.8 99.7 90.6 95.2
AME-1 [15] 96.0 95.7 95.5 99.2 29.2 32.2 44.1 51.2
MoE [68] 95.0 96.7 90.5 52.9 55.3 41.0 30.8 45.0
Best results (within 5% of the maximum) are shown in bold.
TABLE III
SUCCESS RATES (%) OF DIFFERENT STUDENT DESIGNS ON TRAINING AND TEST TERRAINS
Training Terrains Test Terrains
Student Design
Dense Climbing Sparse Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Test 4 avg. Test
AME-2 (Student) 96.4 96.4 91.8 90.0 77.7 89.1 72.9 82.4
Visual Recurrent Student [48] 98.0 97.9 86.4 34.5 20.9 99.8 50.6 51.5
AME-2 (Student) w/o RL 95.8 87.9 84.6 46.9 59.1 90.6 46.0 60.7
AME-2 (Student) w/o rep. loss 95.8 94.8 86.5 81.9 82.6 69.5 60.4 73.6
AME-2 (Teacher) 97.9 96.0 95.2 96.8 93.8 99.7 90.6 95.2
Best student results (within 5% of the maximum) are shown in bold.
Regarding the learning setup, we find that direct teacher
(a)
supervision (action distillation plus representation alignment)
already yields good performance on the training terrains, but
does not produce strong generalization to unseen terrains
without RL. Incorporating RL is important for performance
on the test terrains, and the representation loss gives a further
(b)
improvement. Overall, our student policy architecture per-
forms better on unseen terrains than the end-to-end visual
recurrent policy, and our learning design, with mixed RL
losses and teacher supervision losses (action distillation and
representation alignment), further enhances the generalization.
Fig. 17. Emergent impact reduction behaviors. (a) ANYmal-D uses its knee
to support the body when climbing down, and gently touches the ground to
reduce the impact. (b) TRON1 extends one leg while jumping down, and C. Mapping Designs
retracts it during landing before switching support to the other leg.
We benchmark our mapping pipeline against two baselines:
1) The end-to-end student design from [48], the previous 1) Our pipeline, with the mapping model trained only on
state of the art in agile generalist locomotion, which uses locomotion training terrains.
recurrent networks with vision inputs. 2) A temporal recurrent model that directly predicts ego-
2) An AME-2 student trained without RL losses, using only centric elevation maps from local grid observations and
teacher action distillation and the representation loss. delta transforms.
3) An AME-2 student trained without the representation The first baseline tests whether additional diverse meshes
loss. (both traversable and untraversable) are necessary for better
The results are summarized in Table III. On the training generalization. The second contrasts our per-frame fusion
terrains, all student policies perform well, with our proposed approach with an end-to-end recurrent neural memory model:
design achieving slightly higher success rates on sparse ter- the recurrent model tends to overfit terrain patterns seen during
rains. On unseen test terrains, our student achieves the best training and produces lower-quality maps on unseen terrains,
overall success rates. as we will show in the qualitative comparison in Fig. 19.
The end-to-end visual recurrent student from [48] performs All pipelines are evaluated on data collected from the same
slightly better than ours on Test 3, a parkour course with rollout trajectories, with results reported in Table IV. We use
obstacles, but underperforms on all other test terrains that the L loss defined in Eq. 9 as the metric, which balances es-
0.5
contain sparse regions. On Test 3, most of our student’s failures timation accuracy and uncertainty quantification. The temporal
occur when it attempts to climb the obstacles, which can be recurrent model (detailed in Appendix D) uses a CNN encoder
misinterpreted as higher platforms due to occlusions and the for local grids, an MLP encoder for delta transforms, and
observed surface elevations. In contrast, using the full depth Spatially-Enhanced Recurrent Units (SRU), an architecture
image, as in the visual recurrent design, may provide richer that enables 100 m-scale mapless visual navigation [88], as the
cues and a longer reaction horizon for obstacle avoidance. memory module. To stabilize training and prevent the model
Despite this modest drop in generalization around obstacles, from collapsing to large uncertainties and poor estimates, we
our student controller achieves much higher success rates on have to train the recurrent model only on locomotion training
sparse and mixed terrains. terrains with the policy in the loop (as done in prior work [29],

===== PAGE 15 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 15
Stair Down Obstacles Climbing Up
Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context
Climbing Down Gap Beam
Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context
Test 1 Test 2
Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context
Test 3 Test 4
Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context Local Attention Global Context
Fig. 18. Feature patterns of our ANYmal-D controller. We visualize the neural elevation map together with the corresponding local-attention and global-context
weights. Points indicate elevation estimates, lines indicate uncertainties, and higher-intensity red colors correspond to higher weights. Local attention weights
provide fine-grained patterns for locomotion control, while global context features primarily focus on sparse points that characterize the terrain type.
[33]) and add an auxiliary L2 loss on the elevation estimates in (replaced by random points in depth clouds), and with the
addition to L . This setup requires roughly 5× more training front upper camera disabled. The tested setups are all above
0.5
time to converge than our mapping models. the randomization ranges during training.
It is worth noting that the recurrent model can optimize The results are presented in Table V. Under missing points
both the elevation estimates and the associated uncertainties and artifacts, we find the policy performance does not drop,
in unseen regions based on the training distribution, which and can sometimes be slightly better. This can be explained
is advantageous under the L loss, whereas our pipeline by that, fewer effective points in the depth clouds result in
0.5
uses heuristic defaults. However, as illustrated in Fig. 19, our more uncertain regions and make the policy behave more
mapping pipeline produces higher-quality maps in practice, conservatively.
and can effectively model occlusions with high uncertainties. When the front upper camera is disabled, the system still
performs well on most terrains without re-training, highlight-
ing the flexibility of our method for different sensor configura-
D. Robustness to Visual Noise
tions. However, on terrains that require active perception, such
We validate the robustness of our system to noise and sensor as the high obstacles to climb in Test 2 and Test 3, the policy
degradation. We evaluate our student policy’s success rates struggles, suggesting that these behaviors remain sensitive to
under missing points (removed from depth clouds), artifacts the available sensor viewpoints.

===== PAGE 16 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 16
TABLE IV
L0.5 LOSS OF DIFFERENT NEURAL MAPPING METHODS ON TRAINING AND TEST TERRAINS
Training Terrains Test Terrains
Mapping Pipeline
Dense Climbing Sparse Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Test 4 avg. Test
Ours -0.006 -0.108 0.020 0.033 0.227 0.036 -0.111 0.046
Ours (Loco-Only) 0.020 -0.090 0.081 0.104 0.234 0.087 -0.075 0.088
Temporal Recurrent -0.162 -0.114 -0.101 0.316 0.135 0.066 -0.176 0.085
Best (lowest) results are shown in bold.
TABLE V
SUCCESS RATES (%) OF THE STUDENT POLICY UNDER NOISE AND SENSOR DEGRADATION
Training Terrains Test Terrains
Setup
Dense Climbing Sparse Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Test 4 avg. Test
Nominal 96.4 96.4 91.8 90.0 77.7 89.1 72.9 82.4
20% Missing Points 95.5 94.9 91.3 91.1 77.3 90.3 74.8 83.4
3% Artifacts 96.4 97.6 93.2 95.2 72.8 92.5 80.3 85.2
1 Camera Disabled 91.2 82.0 85.9 95.1 56.0 1.1 74.6 56.7
VIII. DISCUSSION drawback is that it offers less direct control over the robot’s
intermediate motion, which can be troublesome when semantic
In this paper, we propose AME-2, a unified RL framework
obstacles lie along the path but appear traversable from the
for agile and generalizable legged locomotion with attention-
geometry. We envision combining both command interfaces
based neural map encoding. We use goal-reaching rewards to
within a single controller in future work, e.g., via masked
incentivize agile behaviors, and design the AME-2 encoder
commands and distillation [89].
to achieve generalization across diverse challenging terrains.
To facilitate sim-to-real deployment, we combine teacher-
student learning with RL and introduce a lightweight neural C. Whole-Body Skills
mapping pipeline that explicitly models partial observability
We achieve whole-body locomotion skills in this work, but
while running identically in simulation and on real robots. Our
for a given terrain type the learned motions tend to follow
framework applies to both a quadruped and a biped without
similar contact patterns. For systems with higher DoFs, such
changing the rewards or training settings.
as humanoids, the same terrain type at different scales may
require different contact strategies. For example, a humanoid
A. Modular v.s. End-to-End may step onto low obstacles with a single leg, use a two-
leg jump for medium heights, and leverage both arms and
Classical locomotion systems [2], [4] use modular designs
legs for higher obstacles. It remains unclear whether our
(perception, planning, and control) to make the problem
method, without additional references or priors such as [86],
tractable, and can generalize well when their underlying
can automatically discover such diverse contact patterns to
assumptions hold (e.g., low uncertainty, stable foot contacts,
handle a broader range of terrains in higher-DoF systems.
accurate mapping and dynamics modeling). Recent works in-
stead reduce system complexity through end-to-end sensor-to-
motor policy learning [38], [48], but have not yet demonstrated D. Towards Higher Success Rates on Unseen Terrains
strong generalization to unseen terrains. We still observe more failures on unseen test terrains than on
Our work tries to bridge these two. We use a mapping training terrains, as expected for learning-based systems. No-
module and a controller module, and train the neural controller tably, most failures occur during skill transitions. For example,
end-to-end to generate joint actions from observations. In on Test 2 the robot must first decelerate on a sparse region and
the controller, our AME-2 encoder also learns planning-level then execute a climbing maneuver while maintaining precise
representations (global context and local contact-relevant fea- hind-leg footholds. While these specific cases could likely be
tures) for the subsequent decoder, playing a similar role to the addressed by finetuning [48], it remains unclear whether there
planning module in classical solutions. This design preserves is a scalable, principled approach for learning such challenging
a modular structure at the system level while avoiding explicit skill transitions with zero-shot generalization.
online model-based planning. In the mapping module, we keep
a simple heuristic structure, but also run a lightweight neural
E. Limitations and Future Work
network in the loop to improve robustness and generalization
under noise, partial observability, and unseen terrain patterns. This work has several limitations. First, we use a 2.5-D
elevation map and do not address fully 3-D locomotion. Future
work could incorporate multi-layer elevation maps [24], which
B. Goal Reaching v.s. Velocity Tracking
are directly compatible with our policy architecture, or explore
We use a goal-reaching formulation [20] instead of velocity attention-based voxel representations. Second, our controllers
tracking [15]. This encourages more agile behaviors and are not designed for severely degraded perception, such as high
reduces reliance on high-frequency navigation commands. A grass or snow. A promising direction is to combine robust

===== PAGE 17 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 17
Ground Truth Temporal Recurrent Ours
Estimation Uncertainty Estimation Uncertainty
Obstacles
Climbing
Consecutive
Stones
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Fig. 19. Qualitative comparison between the temporal recurrent model and our mapping pipeline on training and test terrains. The visualized maps are
egocentric, with the robot facing rightward. Our mapping pipeline produces accurate estimations when confident and assigns high uncertainty to occluded
regions. In contrast, the temporal recurrent model generates less meaningful uncertainty maps, loses fine-grained details, and performs worse on unseen terrains.
controllers [14] with our agile and generalized controllers from ±0 m to ±0.2 m for ANYmal-D, and from ±0 m
into a single scene-aware policy. Third, our mapping module to ±0.15 m for TRON1. Goals are sampled anywhere on
can fail in highly dynamic environments with occlusions, and the terrain.
could be extended to explicitly reason about moving elements • Stair Down (Dense, 5%): Floating stairs descending with
in the scene. random widths and random walls on both sides. The slope
is increased from 5◦ to 45◦ over the curriculum for both
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS robots. Goals are sampled anywhere on the terrain.
This work is funded by ETH AI Center, NCCR automation, • Stair Up (Dense, 5%): Floating stairs ascending with
random widths and random walls on both sides. The slope
Apple Inc. Any views, opinions, findings, and conclusions or
is increased from 5◦ to 45◦ over the curriculum for both
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
robots. Goals are sampled anywhere on the terrain.
authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views,
policies or position, either expressed or implied, of Apple Inc. • Boxes (Dense, 5%): Heightfields generated by adding
and removing random boxes on flat ground. Over the
We thank the help and insights from Yuni Fuchioka, Elena
curriculum, the maximum box height increases from
Krasnova, William Talbot, Junzhe He, Matthias Heyrman,
0.05 m to 0.4 m for ANYmal-D, and from 0.05 m to
Clemens Schwarke, Jonas Frey, Manthan Patel, Emilio Palma,
0.3 m for TRON1. Goals are sampled anywhere on the
Vladlen Koltun, Matthias Mu¨ller, Siyuan Hu. We thank the
terrain.
support from Martin Vechev. We thank the technical support
from LimX Dynamics and ANYbotics. • Obstacles (Dense, 5%): Random positive and negative
obstacles placed on random slopes. Over the curriculum,
the obstacle density increases from 0 m−2 to 0.5 m−2 for
APPENDIX A
both robots. Goals are sampled anywhere on the terrain.
TERRAIN PARAMETERS
• Climbing Up (Climbing, 20%): A pit to climb out of,
We use the following terrain proportions and parameters for
with vertices near the edges randomly perturbed by up
training:
to 20% of the height. Over the curriculum, the pit height
• Rough (Dense, 5%): Heightfields generated from uni- increases from 0.1 m to 1.0 m for ANYmal-D, and from
form noise, with terrain resolution smaller than the map 0.1 m to 0.48 m for TRON1. Goals are sampled at the
resolution. Over the curriculum, the noise range increases

===== PAGE 18 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 18
other end of the terrain. projected gravity, 0.01 rad for joint positions, 1.5 rad/s for
• Climbing Down (Climbing, 5%): A platform to climb joint velocities, and 0.05 m for map observations. We also
down from, with vertices near the edges randomly per- add a random drift within [−0.03,0.03] m when querying map
turbed by up to 20% of the height. Over the curriculum, observations.
the platform height increases from 0.2 m to 1.0 m for During student policy training, we make 15% of depth cloud
ANYmal-D, and from 0.2 m to 0.88 m for TRON1. Goals points missing and 2% artifacts. We give 10% of the environ-
are sampled at the other end of the terrain. ments access to complete maps with variance 0.0025 m2. We
• Climbing Consecutive (Climbing, 5%): Two stacked corrupt 1% points in the student map observations by assigning
layers of rings to climb out of. The robot needs to random values with a random variance larger than 1 m2.
consecutively climb up twice and then climb down twice.
Over the curriculum, the first ring height increases from APPENDIX C
0.05 m to 0.5 m for ANYmal-D and from 0.05 m to PPO PARAMETERS
0.3 m for TRON1. The second ring height increases from
We use the following PPO parameters in Table VI.
0.05 m to 0.4 m for ANYmal-D and from 0.05 m to 0.3 m
for TRON1. Goals are sampled at the other end of the
TABLE VI
terrain.
PPO PARAMETERS
• Gap (Sparse, 5%): A gap to jump over, with vertices
near the edges randomly perturbed by up to 10% of the Parameter Value
Value Loss Coefficient 1.0
distance, and a height difference between the two sides Value Loss Clip 0.2
randomly sampled within ±30% of the distance. Over the Entropy Coefficient Decay from 0.004 to 0.001
Learning Epochs per Iteration 4
curriculum, the distance increases from 0.1 m to 1.1 m
Mini Batches per Iteration 3
for ANYmal-D and from 0.1 m to 0.6 m for TRON1. Simulation Steps per Iteration 24
Number of Environments 4800
Goals are sampled at the other end of the terrain.
Learning Rate Adaptive
• Pallets (Sparse, 5%): Parallel beams with random orien- γ 0.99
λ 0.95
tations. Over the curriculum, the beam width decreases
Desired KL Divergence 0.01
from 0.4 m to 0.16 m for both robots. The gap width Student only
Learning Rate When Surrogate Loss Disabled 0.001
increases from 0.08 m to 0.35 m for ANYmal-D and
Action Distillation Loss Coefficient 0.02
from 0.08 m to 0.2 m for TRON1. The inter-beam height Representation Loss Coefficient 0.2
difference increases from 0 m to 0.3 m for ANYmal-D
and from 0 m to 0.2 m for TRON1. Goals are sampled
at the other end of the terrain. APPENDIX D
• Stones (Sparse, 30%): We follow the “Stones- TEMPORAL RECURRENT BASELINE MAPPING MODEL
Everywhere” design in [26] and [15]. Goals are sampled
The architecture of the recurrent model used as the mapping
anywhere on the terrain.
baseline is shown in Fig. 20. We provide the model with
• Beam (Sparse, 5%): A beam connecting two platforms, ground-truth delta transforms, which are sufficient for map
randomly inclined with roll, pitch, and yaw sampled
reconstruction and serve as a clean replacement for the pro-
within ±0.1 rad, and with a platform height difference
prioceptive observations used in prior work [29], [33], where
sampled within ±0.2 m. Over the curriculum, the beam
transforms are not directly available.
width decreases from 0.9 m to 0.18 m for both robots.
Goals are sampled at the other end of the terrain.
Local Grids CNN MLP Estimation Output
For sparse terrains, we add physical floors to half of
them and virtual floors (visible in the map without physical
Concat MLP SRU Uncertainty Output
collision) to the other half. The floor height is randomized
between −1.5 m and −0.35 m. This discourages the robot Delta Transforms MLP
from walking on the floor when traversing shallow sparse
terrains. Fig. 20. The temporal recurrent model architecture to predict egocentric
elevation mapping.
APPENDIX B
RANDOMIZATION PARAMETERS
REFERENCES
For both robots, we randomize the payload within
[1] P. Fankhauser, M. Bjelonic, C. D. Bellicoso, T. Miki, and M. Hutter,
[−5,5] kg, actuation delays within [0,0.02] s, and friction “Robust rough-terrain locomotion with a quadrupedal robot,” in 2018
coefficients within [0.3,1.0]. For TRON1, we additionally IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 5761–5768.
apply random biases to PD gains and armatures within ±15%
[2] F. Jenelten, R. Grandia, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Tamols: Terrain-
of the raw values. aware motion optimization for legged systems,” IEEE Transactions on
For policy observations, we add zero-mean uniform noise Robotics, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 3395–3413, 2022.
[3] S. Fahmi, V. Barasuol, D. Esteban, O. Villarreal, and C. Semini,
with the following maximum magnitudes: 0.1 m/s for base
“Vital: Vision-based terrain-aware locomotion for legged robots,” IEEE
linear velocity, 0.2 rad/s for base angular velocity, 0.05 for Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 885–904, 2022.

===== PAGE 19 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 19
[4] R. Grandia, F. Jenelten, S. Yang, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Per- [26] C. Zhang, N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile locomo-
ceptive locomotion through nonlinear model-predictive control,” IEEE tion on risky terrains,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 3402–3421, 2023. Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11864–11871.
[5] R. Akizhanov, V. Dhe´din, M. Khadiv, and I. Laptev, “Learning [27] F. Shi, C. Zhang, T. Miki, J. Lee, M. Hutter, and S. Coros, “Re-
feasible transitions for efficient contact planning,” arXiv preprint thinking robustness assessment: Adversarial attacks on learning-based
arXiv:2407.11788, 2024. quadrupedal locomotion controllers,” in Robotics: Science and Systems
[6] R. J. Griffin, G. Wiedebach, S. McCrory, S. Bertrand, I. Lee, and XX, Delft, The Netherlands, July 15-19, 2024, D. Kulic, G. Venture,
J. Pratt, “Footstep planning for autonomous walking over rough terrain,” K. E. Bekris, and E. Coronado, Eds., 2024.
in 2019 IEEE-RAS 19th International Conference on Humanoid Robots [28] J. Lee, M. Bjelonic, A. Reske, L. Wellhausen, T. Miki, and M. Hutter,
(Humanoids), 2019, pp. 9–16. “Learning robust autonomous navigation and locomotion for wheeled-
[7] C. Mastalli, W. Merkt, G. Xin, J. Shim, M. Mistry, I. Havoutis, and legged robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 9, no. 89, p. eadi9641, 2024.
S. Vijayakumar, “Agile maneuvers in legged robots: a predictive control [29] J. Sun, G. Han, P. Sun, W. Zhao, J. Cao, J. Wang, Y. Guo, and Q. Zhang,
approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07554, 2022. “Dpl: Depth-only perceptive humanoid locomotion via realistic depth
[8] F. Jenelten, T. Miki, A. E. Vijayan, M. Bjelonic, and M. Hutter, synthesis and cross-attention terrain reconstruction,” arXiv preprint
“Perceptive locomotion in rough terrain – online foothold optimization,” arXiv:2510.07152, 2025.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 5370–5376, [30] Y. Yang, G. Shi, C. Lin, X. Meng, R. Scalise, M. G. Castro, W. Yu,
2020. T. Zhang, D. Zhao, J. Tan et al., “Agile continuous jumping in discon-
[9] F. Jenelten, J. Hwangbo, F. Tresoldi, C. D. Bellicoso, and M. Hutter, tinuous terrains,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
“Dynamic locomotion on slippery ground,” IEEE Robotics and Automa- and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2025, pp. 10245–10252.
tion Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 4170–4176, 2019. [31] D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, C. Choy, A. Anandkumar, and M. Hutter,
[10] P.Fankhauser,M.Bloesch,andM.Hutter,“Probabilisticterrainmapping “Neural scene representation for locomotion on structured terrain,” IEEE
for mobile robots with uncertain localization,” IEEE Robotics and Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 8667–8674, 2022.
Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 3019–3026, 2018. [32] D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, D. Sako, and M. Hutter, “Anymal parkour:
[11] T. Miki, L. Wellhausen, R. Grandia, F. Jenelten, T. Homberger, and Learning agile navigation for quadrupedal robots,” Science Robotics,
M. Hutter, “Elevation mapping for locomotion and navigation using vol. 9, no. 88, p. eadi7566, 2024.
gpu,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots [33] R. Yu, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Wu, and Q. Zhu, “Walking
and Systems (IROS), 2022, pp. 2273–2280. with terrain reconstruction: Learning to traverse risky sparse footholds,”
[12] S. Ha, J. Lee, M. van de Panne, Z. Xie, W. Yu, and M. Khadiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.15692, 2024.
“Learning-based legged locomotion: State of the art and future perspec- [34] H. Duan, B. Pandit, M. S. Gadde, B. Van Marum, J. Dao, C. Kim,
tives,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 44, no. 8, and A. Fern, “Learning vision-based bipedal locomotion for challeng-
pp. 1396–1427, 2025. ing terrain,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
[13] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 56–62.
in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning,” in [35] A. Agarwal, A. Kumar, J. Malik, and D. Pathak, “Legged locomotion
Conference on robot learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 91–100. in challenging terrains using egocentric vision,” in Proceedings of The
[14] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, 6th Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2023.
“Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the [36] X. Cheng, K. Shi, A. Agarwal, and D. Pathak, “Extreme parkour with
wild,” Science robotics, vol. 7, no. 62, p. eabk2822, 2022. legged robots,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
[15] J. He, C. Zhang, F. Jenelten, R. Grandia, M. Ba¨cher, and M. Hutter, Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11443–11450.
“Attention-based map encoding for learning generalized legged locomo- [37] R. Yang, M. Zhang, N. Hansen, H. Xu, and X. Wang, “Learning vision-
tion,” Science Robotics, vol. 10, no. 105, p. eadv3604, 2025. guided quadrupedal locomotion end-to-end with cross-modal transform-
[16] A. Allshire, H. Choi, J. Zhang, D. McAllister, A. Zhang, C. M. Kim, ers,” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
T. Darrell, P. Abbeel, J. Malik, and A. Kanazawa, “Visual imitation [38] Z. Zhuang, S. Yao, and H. Zhao, “Humanoid parkour learning,” in
enables contextual humanoid control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03729, Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2025, pp. 1975–1991.
2025. [39] S. Li, S. Luo, J. Wu, and Q. Zhu, “Move: Multi-skill omnidirectional
[17] J. Long, J. Ren, M. Shi, Z. Wang, T. Huang, P. Luo, and J. Pang, “Learn- legged locomotion with limited view in 3d environments,” in 2025 IEEE
ing humanoid locomotion with perceptive internal model,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2025, pp.
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 7647–7653.
2025, pp. 9997–10003. [40] Q. Ben, B. Xu, K. Li, F. Jia, W. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Wang,
[18] J. Ren, T. Huang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. Ben, J. Long, Y. Yang, J. Pang, D. Lin, and J. Pang, “Gallant: Voxel grid-based humanoid locomotion
and P. Luo, “Vb-com: Learning vision-blind composite humanoid loco- and local-navigation across 3d constrained terrains,” arXiv preprint
motion against deficient perception,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14814, arXiv:2511.14625, 2025.
2025. [41] S. Luo, S. Li, R. Yu, Z. Wang, J. Wu, and Q. Zhu, “Pie: Parkour with
[19] H. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Ren, Q. Ben, T. Huang, W. Zhang, and J. Pang, implicit-explicit learning framework for legged robots,” IEEE Robotics
“Beamdojo: Learning agile humanoid locomotion on sparse footholds,” and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 9986–9993, 2024.
in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2025. [42] E. Chane-Sane, J. Amigo, T. Flayols, L. Righetti, and N. Mansard,
[20] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, M. Bjelonic, and M. Hutter, “Advanced skills by “Soloparkour: Constrained reinforcement learning for visual locomotion
learning locomotion and local navigation end-to-end,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ from privileged experience,” in Proceedings of The 8th Conference on
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol.
2022, pp. 2497–2503. 270. PMLR, 2025, pp. 4268–4285.
[21] F. Jenelten, J. He, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Dtc: Deep tracking [43] S. Kareer, N. Yokoyama, D. Batra, S. Ha, and J. Truong, “Vinl: Visual
control,” Science Robotics, vol. 9, no. 86, p. eadh5401, 2024. navigation and locomotion over obstacles,” in 2023 IEEE International
[22] S. Gangapurwala, M. Geisert, R. Orsolino, M. Fallon, and I. Havoutis, Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2023, pp.
“Rloc: Terrain-aware legged locomotion using reinforcement learning 2018–2024.
and optimal control,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 38, no. 5, [44] H. Lai, J. Cao, J. Xu, H. Wu, Y. Lin, T. Kong, Y. Yu, and W. Zhang,
pp. 2908–2927, 2022. “World model-based perception for visual legged locomotion,” in 2025
[23] Y. Dong, J. Ma, L. Zhao, W. Li, and P. Lu, “Marg: Mastering risky gap IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
terrains for legged robots with elevation mapping,” IEEE Transactions 2025, pp. 11531–11537.
on Robotics, 2025. [45] P. Li, H. Li, Y. Ma, L. Chang, X. Yang, R. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Cao,
[24] Y. Chen, J. Ma, Z. Luo, Y. Han, Y. Dong, B. Xu, and P. Lu, “Learning Q. Zhu, and G. Sartoretti, “Kivi: Kinesthetic-visuospatial integration
autonomous and safe quadruped traversal of complex terrains using for dynamic and safe egocentric legged locomotion,” arXiv preprint
multi-layer elevation maps,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, arXiv:2509.23650, 2025.
2025. [46] H. Su, H. Luo, S. Yang, K. Jiang, W. Zhang, and H. Chen, “Lipm-guided
[25] T. Miki, J. Lee, L. Wellhausen, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk in reinforcement learning for stable and perceptive locomotion in bipedal
confined spaces using 3d representation,” in 2024 IEEE International robots,” in 2025 IEEE-RAS 24th International Conference on Humanoid
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2024, pp. 8649–8656. Robots (Humanoids), 2025, pp. 1031–1038.

===== PAGE 20 =====
JOURNAL SUBMISSION 20
[47] D. Wang, X. Wang, X. Liu, J. Shi, Y. Zhao, C. Bai, and X. Li, “More: T. Howard, and N. Atanasov, Eds., 2018. [Online]. Available:
Mixture of residual experts for humanoid lifelike gaits learning on http://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss14/p08.html
complex terrains,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08840, 2025. [68] Z. Chen, M. Ji, X. Cheng, X. Peng, X. B. Peng, and X. Wang, “Gmt:
[48] N.Rudin,J.He,J.Aurand,andM.Hutter,“Parkourinthewild:Learning General motion tracking for humanoid whole-body control,” arXiv
a general and extensible agile locomotion policy using multi-expert preprint arXiv:2506.14770, 2025.
distillation and rl fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11164, 2025. [69] N. Messikommer, J. Xing, E. Aljalbout, and D. Scaramuzza,
[49] T. He, C. Zhang, W. Xiao, G. He, C. Liu, and G. Shi, “Agile but safe: “Student-informed teacher training,” in 7th Robot Learning Workshop:
Learning collision-free high-speed legged locomotion,” in Proceedings Towards Robots with Human-Level Abilities, 2025. [Online]. Available:
of Robotics: Science and Systems, Delft, Netherlands, July 2024. https://openreview.net/forum?id=q06EAFOwDI
[50] C. Zhang, J. Jin, J. Frey, N. Rudin, M. Mattamala, C. Cadena, and [70] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning
M. Hutter, “Resilient legged local navigation: Learning to traverse quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Science robotics,
with compromised perception end-to-end,” in 2024 IEEE International vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020.
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2024, pp. 34–41. [71] T. Pfau, A. G. de Rivaz, S. Brighton, and R. Weller, “Kinetics of jump
[51] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian landing in agility dogs,” The Veterinary Journal, vol. 190, no. 2, pp.
deep learning for computer vision?” Advances in neural information 278–283, 2011.
processing systems, vol. 30, 2017. [72] S. McErlain-Naylor, M. King, and S. Allen, “Surface acceleration
[52] S. Jung, D. Gwak, B. Boots, and J. Hays, “Uncertainty-aware accurate transmission during drop landings in humans,” Journal of Biomechanics,
elevation modeling for off-road navigation via neural processes,” in vol. 118, p. 110269, 2021.
Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2025, pp. 2802–2822. [73] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
[53] H. Wang, Z. Shi, C. Zhu, Y. Qiao, C. Zhang, F. Yang, P. Ren, L. Lu, and “Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
D. Xuan, “Integrating learning-based manipulation and physics-based simulationtotherealworld,”in2017IEEE/RSJinternationalconference
locomotion for whole-body badminton robot control,” arXiv preprint on intelligent robots and systems (IROS). IEEE, 2017, pp. 23–30.
arXiv:2504.17771, 2025. [74] C. Schwarke, M. Mittal, N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, and M. Hutter, “Rsl-rl: A
learning library for robotics research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10771,
[54] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch et al., “Anymal-a 2025.
highly mobile and dynamic quadrupedal robot,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ in- [75] O. R. developers, “Onnx runtime,” https://onnxruntime.ai/, 2025.
ternational conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS). IEEE, [76] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, V. Koltun,
and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged
2016, pp. 38–44.
robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019.
[55] LimX Dynamics, “TRON 1: The first multi-modal biped robot,” https:
[77] Y.-H. Shin, T.-G. Song, G. Ji, and H.-W. Park, “Actuator-constrained
//www.limxdynamics.com/en/tron1, 2025, accessed: 2025-11-23.
reinforcement learning for high-speed quadrupedal locomotion,” arXiv
[56] H. J. Lee, S. Hong, and S. Kim, “Integrating model-based footstep
preprint arXiv:2312.17507, 2023.
planning with model-free reinforcement learning for dynamic legged
[78] O.Ronneberger,P.Fischer,andT.Brox,“U-net:Convolutionalnetworks
locomotion,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Conference on
Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11248–11255.
Medicalimagecomputingandcomputer-assistedintervention. Springer,
[57] W.Yu,D.Jain,A.Escontrela,A.Iscen,P.Xu,E.Coumans,S.Ha,J.Tan,
2015, pp. 234–241.
and T. Zhang, “Visual-locomotion: Learning to walk on complex terrains
[79] M. Macklin, “Warp: A high-performance python framework for gpu
with vision,” in 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
simulation and graphics,” https://github.com/nvidia/warp, March 2022,
[58] R. Yang, G. Yang, and X. Wang, “Neural volumetric memory for visual
nVIDIA GPU Technology Conference (GTC).
locomotion control,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
[80] M.Seitzer,A.Tavakoli,D.Antic,andG.Martius,“Onthepitfallsofhet-
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2023, pp. 1430–1440.
eroscedastic uncertainty estimation with probabilistic neural networks,”
[59] H. Kim, A. Mnih, J. Schwarz, M. Garnelo, A. Eslami, D. Rosenbaum,
in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
O. Vinyals, and Y. W. Teh, “Attentive neural processes,” arXiv preprint
[81] A. Chambolle, “An algorithm for total variation minimization and
arXiv:1901.05761, 2019.
applications,” Journal of Mathematical imaging and vision, vol. 20,
[60] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
no. 1, pp. 89–97, 2004.
imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
[82] S. Khattak, T. Homberger, L. Bernreiter, J. Nubert, O. Andersson,
2017.
R. Siegwart, K. Alexis, and M. Hutter, “Compslam: Complementary
[61] V.Makoviychuk,L.Wawrzyniak,Y.Guo,M.Lu,K.Storey,M.Macklin, hierarchical multi-modal localization and mapping for robot autonomy
D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, A. Allshire, A. Handa et al., “Isaac gym: High in underground environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06483, 2025.
performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning,” arXiv [83] J. Nubert, S. Khattak, and M. Hutter, “Graph-based multi-sensor fusion
preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021. for consistent localization of autonomous construction robots,” in 2022
[62] X. B. Peng and M. van de Panne, “Learning locomotion skills using International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
deeprl: does the choice of action space matter?” in Proceedings of the 2022, pp. 10048–10054.
ACM SIGGRAPH / Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation, [84] K. Chen, R. Nemiroff, and B. T. Lopez, “Direct lidar-inertial odometry:
ser. SCA ’17. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Lightweight lio with continuous-time motion correction,” in 2023 IEEE
Machinery, 2017. International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
[63] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, 2023, pp. 3983–3989.
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in [85] Z. Zhuang and H. Zhao, “Embrace contacts: humanoid shadowing
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017. with full body ground contacts,” in 9th Annual Conference on Robot
[64] C. Zhang, W. Xiao, T. He, and G. Shi, “Wococo: Learning whole-body Learning, 2025.
humanoid control with sequential contacts,” in Proceedings of The 8th [86] L. Yang, X. Huang, Z. Wu, A. Kanazawa, P. Abbeel, C. Sferrazza,
Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning C. K. Liu, R. Duan, and G. Shi, “Omniretarget: Interaction-preserving
Research, vol. 270. PMLR, 2025, pp. 455–472. data generation for humanoid whole-body loco-manipulation and scene
[65] T. He, Z. Luo, X. He, W. Xiao, C. Zhang, W. Zhang, K. M. Kitani, interaction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26633, 2025.
C. Liu, and G. Shi, “Omnih2o: Universal and dexterous human-to- [87] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
humanoid whole-body teleoperation and learning,” in Proceedings of T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly,
The 8th Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words:
Learning Research, vol. 270. PMLR, November 2025, pp. 1516–1540. Transformers for image recognition at scale,” ICLR, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v270/he25b.html [88] F. Yang, P. Frivik, D. Hoeller, C. Wang, C. Cadena, and M. Hutter,
[66] Z. Li, X. B. Peng, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, G. Berseth, and K. Sreenath, “Spatially-enhanced recurrent memory for long-range mapless naviga-
“Reinforcement learning for versatile, dynamic, and robust bipedal tion via end-to-end reinforcement learning,” The International Journal
locomotion control,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, of Robotics Research, p. 02783649251401926, 2025.
2024. [89] T. He, W. Xiao, T. Lin, Z. Luo, Z. Xu, Z. Jiang, J. Kautz, C. Liu, G. Shi,
[67] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, X. Wang, L. J. Fan, and Y. Zhu, “HOVER: versatile neural whole-body
“Asymmetric actor critic for image-based robot learning,” in Robotics: controller for humanoid robots,” in IEEE International Conference on
Science and Systems XIV, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Robotics and Automation, ICRA. IEEE, 2025, pp. 9989–9996.
Pennsylvania, USA, June 26-30, 2018, H. Kress-Gazit, S. S. Srinivasa,